Falling Short of Their Profession’s Needs: Education and Research in Library & Information Studies1 Wayne A. Wiegand Florida State University. Email: wwiegand@fsu.edu By taking a “library in the life of the user” rather than the conventional “user in the life of the library” perspective in his research on Part of Our Lives: A People’s History of the American Public Library (2015), the author concludes that Americans have loved their public libraries for three reasons: information access, the library as place, and the commonplace stories that libraries supply by the billions. It is the view of the author that library and information studies research and education concentrate most attention on the first, hardly any on the last two, and as a result, fall short of meeting their profes- sion’s needs. Keywords: reading and libraries, library as place, LIS education, LIS research, public libraries, information access There is no Holy Book in which God Information Access tells us what libraries should be. Over the centuries, the contours of library ser- While sitting at a Cincinnati public li- vices and collections have instead been brary desk in 1867, Thomas Edison com- mediated by humans, including founders, piled a bibliography on electricity. “Many funders, managers and—surprise, sur- times Edison would get excused from duty prise—users. That’s the conclusion I came under pretense of being too sick to work,” to after researching and writing Part of Our a colleague later recalled, “and invariably Lives: A People’s History of the American strike a beeline for the Library, where he Public Library. In it, I trace the history would spend the entire day and evening of this ubiquitous institution, largely by reading . . . such works on electricity as listening to the voices of those who have were to be had.” used libraries since the mid-19th century, In 1971, 10-year-old Barack Obama re- to identify reasons why it has been loved turned to Honolulu from Jakarta. “The first for generations. place I wanted to be was in a library,” he As I analyzed the data, I was surprised said years later. “One Saturday . . ., with at how quickly those reasons organized the help of a raspy-voiced old librarian into three broad categories. People have who appreciated my seriousness, I found loved their public libraries for: (1) the use- a book on East Africa.” Obama wanted ful information they made accessible, (2) information about Kenya, birthplace of the transformative potential of common- his father, a Luo tribe member. “The Luo place reading they circulated, and (3) the raised cattle and lived in mud huts and ate public spaces they provided. Examples corn meal and yams and something called abound. millet,” the book noted. “Their traditional 1A version of this article appeared as: “Falling Short of Their Profession’s Needs: Education and Research in Li- brary & Information Studies,” Inside Higher Education, October 17, 2016, at: https://www.insidehighered.com/ views/2016/10/17/how-library-and-information-studies-research-shortchanging-libraries-essay? J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 58, No. 1—(Winter) January 2017 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2017 Association for Library and Information Science Education 39 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/58/1/4
40 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE costume was a leather thong across the eral times weekly. Director Annie Wat- crotch.” Shocked by what he read, Obama ters later recalled their interactions. “He “left the book open-faced on a table and would walk up to the desk and . . . look walked out.” me straight in the eye.” “Hello, Martin Lu- ther,” she responded, always calling him The Transformative Potential of by his first and middle names. “What’s on Reading your mind?” “Oh, nothing, particularly.” For Watters, that was the cue King had After her father died in 1963, nine- learned a new “big word,” and between year-old Sonia Sotomayor buried herself them they had a conversation in which in reading at her Bronx library and the King used the word repeatedly. Anoth- apartment she shared with her mother er game involved poetry. Again, King and brother. “Nancy Drew had a power- would stand by the desk, waiting. “What’s ful hold on my imagination,” she remem- on your mind, Martin Luther?” Watters bered. “Every night, when I’d finished asked. “For I dipped into the future, far as reading and got into bed and closed my the human eye could see,” he responded. eyes, I would continue the story, with me Watters recognized the Tennyson poem, in Nancy’s shoes until I fell asleep.” Her and finished the verse: “Saw the vision of mind, she noted, “worked in ways very the world, and all the wonder that would similar” to Nancy’s. “I was a keen ob- be.” server and listener. I picked up on clues. I In 2005, the Washington Post carried an figured things out logically, and I enjoyed article by Eric Wee on a District of Colum- puzzles. I loved the clear focused feeling bia branch library in one of Washington’s that came when I concentrated on solving poorest neighborhoods. In it, Wee reported a problem and everything else faded out.” that every Tuesday night a homeless man Today Sonia Sotomayor is a United States named Conrad Cheek entered the library Supreme Court Justice. and set up his chessboard on a table in the In 1984, President Ronald Reagan children’s room. Wee immediately no- wrote the daughter-in-law of Harold Bell ticed a transformation. “No more ignored Wright, whose bestselling 1920s religious pleas” for this homeless man, “no averted novel That Printer of Udell’s Reagan read glances. During the next hour, people will as an adolescent in Dixon, Illinois. Shortly look him in the eye. They’ll listen to his after reading the book, he declared himself words. In this down-at-the-heels library saved and was baptized. The novel’s pro- he’s the teacher.” tagonist, Reagan wrote Wright’s daugh- Information access, the transformative ter-in-law 60 years later, served as a role power of commonplace reading, library as model that shaped his life. It’s likely the place—all three combine to explain why copy of That Printer of Udell’s Reagan Americans have valued their public librar- read came from the Dixon Public Library, ies for the past 160 years. By harnessing which he visited twice weekly in the early the literatures on information access, com- 1920s, often reading on the library’s front monplace reading, and public spaces to steps. analyze the historical roles of American public libraries, Part of Our Lives shows Library as Place that from their origins they have contrib- uted to their host communities in multiple In the 1930s at the Atlanta Public Li- ways. brary’s African American branch, one of They have been places of performance the few public places where blacks felt where users displayed moral progress and safe and welcome, 10-year-old Martin achievement. They have functioned as Luther King, Jr., came to the library sev- centripetal forces to craft a sense of com-
Falling Short of Their Profession’s Needs: Education and Research 41 munity among disparate populations and ited by the American Library Association) evolve community trust among its multi- met for the first time in 2005, none had cultural elements. They have acted as key core courses analyzing reading and place players not only to increase literacy (like from the “library in the life of the user” tens of thousands of their predecessors, perspective that I took in Part of our Lives. immigrants are still learning English by That’s unfortunate, because my his- reading printed materials from their pub- torical research suggests that not knowing lic libraries) but also to construct group more about the reading and places librar- identity through the stories and places ies of all types provide greatly limits our they provided. And public libraries have ability to understand more deeply what li- also started neighborhood conversations, braries actually mean to their host commu- welcomed the recently arrived into their nities. My research has demonstrated that midst, and served as community anchors. generations of users have valued the pub- lic library as a place by voluntarily visit- A Limited Focus ing it again and again for multiple reasons, many of which had nothing to do with in- I could only come to those conclu- formation access. sions, however, by tapping deeply into Although I-school curricula emphasize non-library and information studies (LIS) services leading to the kinds of informa- literature that addresses reading and place. tion Thomas Edison and Barack Obama For most of its history, LIS has focused found useful, they undervalue the impacts instead on what in the 18th century was of information products that guided the called “useful knowledge,” in the 19th lives of Ronald Reagan and Sonia Soto- and 20th was called “best reading,” and in mayor, and they overlook the importance the late 20th morphed into “information.” of library as place so evident in the experi- That focused term has given particular ences of Martin Luther King, Jr., and Con- meaning to phrases like “information ac- rad Cheek. cess,” “information literacy,” and “infor- If Part of Our Lives proves that reading mation community” that not only tend to and place have been as important to the exaggerate the role of LIS in the larger American public library (and other types world of “information” (see, for example, of libraries) as information access, then how much attention LIS gets in James not having a core course in either at ALA- W. Cortada’s All The Facts: A History accredited programs is the equivalent of of Information in the United States Since an American Bar Association-accredited 1870), but also dominate—and in my view law school without a core course on the limit—the profession’s thinking. Constitution or civil procedure. Unless Take American library education, for organizations like the Association for Li- example. As professional education pro- brary and Information Science Education grams evolved from “library schools” into and the American Library Association, as “schools of information” in the last 30 well as the ALA Committee on Accredita- years, most have focused on “information” tion, insist that reading and place are es- as defined by the professional discourse sential parts of librarianship’s “domain” they inherited, and then incorporated into that must be taught at the core level, LIS that discourse analysis of the storage and education programs will continue to mani- retrieval properties of developing com- fest limitations. munications technologies. In the process, The limitations I find in American LIS however, they removed the library from education and research are also evident the center of their curricula as a subject for in prognostications. In BiblioTech: Why instruction and research. Thus, when the Libraries Matter More Than Ever in the 17 American “I-schools” (12 were accred- Age of Google, for example, John Palfrey
42 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE rightfully contends that library digitiza- dents is much in evidence in these places. tion can equalize access to education, jobs Many college and university libraries also and information, but he worries that “bad installed coffee bars. The collective effect nostalgia” for services like commonplace of these actions (sometimes referred to as reading and traditional library programs the “information commons” movement) will interfere with future planning. In a is obvious at my home institution, Florida January 11, 2016, Wall Street Journal ar- State University, where students now call ticle, Steve Barker laments that because the main Robert G. Strozier Library “Club of emerging technologies “the role for li- Stroz.” In recent years, turnstile counts brarians and public libraries is shrinking.” have spiked. “Don’t mourn the loss of libraries,” John For all of those efforts, however, Amer- McTernan argues in a March 29, 2016, ican researchers outside the profession and Telegraph article, “the Internet has made already overworked library practitioners them obsolete.” have taken the initiative. Where is the LIS Ironically, unlike LIS educators and re- research community? Why aren’t mem- searchers, library practitioners intuitively bers of that community conducting longi- seem to recognize the value of reading and tudinal studies evaluating library activities place. The American library press abounds like the impact of summer programs on in reports of popular programs. Kathleen student reading levels as they move from de la Peña McCook devotes much atten- one grade to another? Where is the LIS tion to library as place in her two editions research that identifies the community ef- (2004 and 2011) of Introduction to Public fects of programs like film festivals, book Librarianship. ALA initiated a “Libraries clubs, children’s story hours, English-as- Transform Lives Campaign” last year to a-second-language classes, literacy tutor- increase awareness of the multiple roles ing, art exhibits and musical presentations America’s academic, school and public that thousands of public libraries have rou- libraries play in their host communities. tinely been hosting for generations? Where Then there’s the “Project Outcome” ini- are the LIS researchers to perform similar tiative ALA’s Public Library Association evaluation studies on the multiple commu- (PLA) recently crafted to measure public nity effects of library reading and library library impacts, the report Public Librar- as place across the country and over time ies: A Vital Space for Family Engagement that take into account demographic vari- released on August 9, 2016, by the Har- ables like race, age, gender, sexual orien- vard Family Research Project and the PLA tation, class, etc.? that calls on libraries to increase efforts Data generated by such research would to engage families in children’s learning, not only benefit librarians struggling to de- and the three-year study entitled “Bring- fine mission statements and justify budgets ing Home Early Literacy: Determining the to city managers, council members, and Impact of Library Programming on Parent school and college and university admin- Behavior” that the U.S. Institute of Muse- istrators, many of whom are convinced the um and Library Services is funding. Internet has made libraries “obsolete.” It And regarding “library as place,” aca- would also help librarians identify which demic librarians in the U.S. and across the programs and services are providing great- globe especially have shown leadership in est benefit to their communities and thus recent years by renovating spaces rescued deserve additional resources. from print collections now digitized and Part of Our Lives shows that, over the accessible online into group study areas generations, American public library us- that students use for a variety of class-re- ers learned many things in multiple ways lated purposes. The sociability that reading through the useful information libraries has fostered for generations among stu- made accessible, the commonplace read-
Falling Short of Their Profession’s Needs: Education and Research 43 ing materials they circulated and the pub- found so instructive in Part of Our Lives, lic spaces they provided. But until LIS ed- and then use those findings to determine if ucators teach library reading and library as the education programs and research agen- place in their professional programs at the das evident in their professional discourse core level, until LIS researchers ask ques- manifest similar limitations. tions about what users learn from their in- Wayne A. Wiegand is F. William Sum- teraction with libraries to determine how mers Professor Emeritus of Library and that learning fits into their everyday lives, Information Studies at Florida State Uni- both are addressing only a fraction of what versity, and author of Part of Our Lives: libraries actually do for their patrons. And A People’s History of the American Public as a result, both fall short of their profes- Library (Oxford University Press, 2015). sion’s needs. I encourage JELIS readers Between January and May, 2017, he will outside the United States to analyze li- be Distinguished Visiting Scholar at the braries in their countries from the “library Library of Congress’s John W. Kluge in the life of the user” perspective that I Center.