The professions of librarianship and law speak about, and urge action regarding, freedom of expression. Free speech is guaranteed under the US Constitution and is a hallmark of American democracy and liberty. This includes the protection of hate speech as political speech, which is unique among Western nations (Braman 2006; Council of Europe 2012). Likewise, librarians, especially under the auspices of the American Library Association (ALA), defend free speech (including, by default, hate speech) in order to protect against ideological exclusions in both the library’s space and its collection. A challenge that exists in law and librarianship, though, is that there is not unanimity among individual voices speaking about the topic. Sometimes the message is that there should be no limits to expression, but sometimes speakers say that there should be some boundaries. This article will address the paradoxes inherent in the messages of each field and will explore the nature of those paradoxes. In part, the differences can be said to be rather straightforward disagreements, but the foundations of the disagreements and the rhetoric of the statements of dispute are not always straightforward. Rhetoric and Argumentation This article presents contraindications to the First Amendment in rhetoric within librarianship and law. Wayne Booth (2004) defined rhetoric as “the entire range of resources that human beings share for producing effects on one another: effects ethical (including everything about character), practical (including political), emotional (including aesthetic), and intellectual (including every academic field). It is the entire range of our use of our ‘signs’ for communicating, effectively or sloppily, ethically or morally” (xi). What is said will be examined, and also how it is said (although Booth mentions “signs,” semiotics is not discussed here). Of particular interest will be speech directed at others: such speech is not neutral but is potentially charged. Speech is integral to argumentation, the rational exchange of thought, and deliberation, but it can also be used to separate and demean individuals and groups. The latter kind of speech is significant in recognizing the paradoxes that are the subject of this article, which asks these questions: Can people truly be free in the face of words that intimidate or in an atmosphere in which harmful expressions flow freely? Can libraries fulfill their democratic mission when hate speech seeks to disrupt it? Can library spaces share inclusive, rigorous debates of ideas that preclude a healthy democracy with intentionally harmful words? Rhetoric, of course, frequently entails formal argumentation as well as less formal narrative discourse. It is expected that the rhetor present a sound case for what is said and provide evidence for conclusions reached. Also required is that the speaker develop the discourse that will persuade a particular audience through argumentation. As Chaim Perelman and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969) define audience, it is “the ensemble of those whom the speaker wishes to influence by his argumentation” (19). They add that the audience is actually a construction of the speaker. Our own intended audience is constructed of people who are knowledgeable about librarianship and information studies. Rhetoric concerning legal interpretations of, and commentary on, free expression is also included; therefore, we will provide sufficient context for the intended audience to follow the arguments. One additional astute observation should be mentioned at the outset, drawing again from Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969): “Objects of agreement relating to the real can be divided into two main groups: the first consists of facts and truths, the second, of presumptions” (67). There must also be some dependence on the study of the writers’ narrative when analyzing written documents. In linguistics, rhetorical analysis can be a fundamentally structuralist endeavor, aimed at explicating speech’s grammatical, syntactical, and morphological structures and using description rather than interpretation (see Culler 1975). This is not wrong, but we propose delving deeper to explore the truth of the narrative—what Booth (2004) calls the original purpose of rhetorical study. There is neither need nor justification for restricting narrative analysis to fiction; the rhetoric of librarianship and of legal scholarship each present “narrative situations” (see Cohn 1990). We contend that those professions’ narratives about free speech have much more in common than not, and demonstrate that there is, without question, no totalizing (i.e., elimination of alternatives) rhetoric regarding freedom of expression. Instead, there are paradoxes that present a puzzling array of choices; the stories offered may share some elements, or they may be radically inconsistent. To summarize, Booth’s definition of rhetoric is used to explicate both sorts of discursive practice—arguments plus the “sloppy” narratives within librarianships’ professional guidelines, and legal narratives. Much legal opinion and many case law decisions consist of formal argumentation, but there are also less formal interpretations of law (including ideas of what ought to be law). Likewise, librarianship has formal codes and guidelines about ideals of professional practice, but interpretations and practice are not as clear. A range of discourse is examined to identify loci for critical thinking about free expression and its limits. Selections from professional statements, including some directly related to law, are analyzed for internal logic and reason and accompanied by examinations taken from legal literature, including selections of case law and opinion. If paradoxical arguments are absent, then there can be said to be consistency of thought and rhetoric/narrative. If there happen to be internal contradictions in the statements examined, the issue is plagued by paradox. Hate Speech and Political Speech: Defining the Problem Does hate speech constitute political speech? Sandra Braman (2006) says that the United States is an outlier among democracies in defending hate speech (defined as that which attacks groups on the basis of race, gender, ethnicity, religion, nationality, or sexual orientation) as political speech. In many countries, hate speech is prohibited because it is believed to cause illegal action (including murder) and to cause emotional and psychological harm. In the United States, though, it is generally believed that limits on hate speech could produce a chilling effect on political speech in general, encroaching on First Amendment rights. The First Amendment was created as a protection of democracy, as insurance against totalitarianism. Public spaces have been legally designated to provide civil spaces for the exercise of First Amendment rights. However, on the rhetorical front, hate speech is intended to intimidate. With intimidation as the intention of discourse, we should also be concerned about its effects on political freedom and civil space. Building on Ernest Gellner’s (1992) triumvirate of postmodernism, reason, and religion, John D. Peters (2005) offers a poetic explanation of “the free speech story” that helps us to understand how people relate to public space. Peters calls librarians heroes of free speech—“perhaps the most passionate believers in free speech theory in the United States, together with the ACLU” (19). This is hardly a point of praise for Peters. He says the complete defense of free speech is an “arid and absolutist” (23) ideal infested with hubris, defended from a moral high ground rather than reason by people whose “equal and open participation comforts those already nestled in the unmarked networks of power while abusing historically oppressed others” (102). He essentially calls for a more compassionate examination of free speech that takes a middle ground and is able to examine individual instances, intelligently making decisions about inclusive public spaces so that everyone can participate. Practically speaking, this is much more difficult than Peters lets on; he presents the moral high ground of absolutism as an arid rhetorical construct, but individuals are fallible and absolutes remove ambiguity. Peters (2005) explains that much of the grounding for free speech absolutism stems from J. S. Mill, especially On Liberty (1869). Mill’s essay defends the individual or the subversive in society against political tyranny or religious repression. He does, however, point out that government must maintain civility in society. This presents a delicate balancing act between coercion and freedom: “The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others” (9). We could, therefore, say that the absolutist stance is based on notions of “harm”—with personal harm to others being the point at which action must be curtailed by the government. This leaves us with a question, though: Can words harm? An absolutist stance on free speech denies either that words have the potential to cause harm or that limiting expression is more harmful than making judgments regarding what might cause harm and curbing those that are indeed harmful. The US Supreme Court has said that some materials should not be available—those that are obscene (for various reasons, though today this almost exclusively falls into the category of sexually explicit materials), fighting words, defamation, treason, and so on. Inciting violence is not legal. However, hate speech (as speech itself, though if it promotes illegal activity, it is, by definition, not legal) has not been included in this list. There are certainly laws against hate crimes that involve physical harm. Laws related to bullying (especially cyberbullying) seem to say, conclusively, that words can indeed cause harm, at least among vulnerable people—especially children (there are few laws about bullying pertaining to adults). The tragic suicide of Rebecca Ann Sedwick brought more attention to cyberbullying in youth; in fact, Sedwick’s tormentors were convicted, as reported in the New York Times.1 Can words cause harm to groups of people? The case against Fred Phelps’s Westboro Baptist Church, whose members regularly picket public places to spread messages of hate (especially against homosexuals, and most notably against homosexuals who have died in war zones) illustrates that the United States is, at this point, committed to protecting abhorrent speech.2 The public, however, regularly rises up to protest Westboro’s pickets, similar to reactions against neo-Nazi marches. Similarly, hate literature is not unlawful. It is not illegal to say bigoted and hateful things in public spaces, nor is it illegal to print or own such materials. Librarianship We posit that libraries have two “spaces” to scrutinize: the collection, which holds ideas, and the space itself. “Intellectual freedom” lies in the space of the shelves and, for instance, the reference desk. “Free speech” happens within the space of the library. However, the distinction between these spaces blurs when discussing, for example, public Internet terminals. Both the physical space and the collection will be discussed here. However, the contents of the collection can contain speech that occurs within a forum, in the sense that the words spoken by someone on a street corner are the product of exercise of a forum. We can examine ALA’s guidelines for librarians as rhetorical documents regarding intellectual freedom. They certainly seem unambiguous, and they might lead one to believe that librarians unequivocally support free speech and intellectual freedom. This professional calling is explicitly stated as a facet of the democratic ideals of self-government in articles 18–20 of “The Universal Right to Free Expression: An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights.”3 Article 20 states: “Freedom of expression is an inalienable human right and the foundation of self-government. Freedom of expression encompasses the freedoms of speech, press, religion, assembly, and association, and the corollary right to receive information.” Candace Morgan (2006) writes: “The First and Fourth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution are integral to American librarianship. They are the basis of the concept librarians call intellectual freedom. Intellectual freedom accords to all library users the right to seek and receive information on all subjects from all points of view without restriction and without having the subject of one’s interest examined or scrutinized by others” (3). ALA’s Core Competence 1B (part of a document used for LIS educational accreditation) states that library education programs should include in the curriculum “the role of library and information professionals in the promotion of democratic principles and intellectual freedom (including freedom of expression, thought, and conscience).”4 Core Competence 1G addresses the “legal framework within which libraries and information agencies operate . . . relating to . . . freedom of expression.” This document articulates both ethical and axiological actions of professionals: how individuals working in libraries should act, and the values that they should espouse in order to perform their professional duties. Professional neutrality is presented as being nonjudgmental—a noble trait that enables free people to search freely. The Freedom to Read Statement (FTR; adopted 1953) is another important guiding document.5 Prior to the 1930s there was little professional thought given to freedom to read; the library was conceived of as an educational institution, with librarians charted to guide people to “the best reading” (though the passage of the FTR did not quickly abolish such professional tendencies). The following excerpts from the the American Library Association’s Freedom to Read Statement demonstrate what librarians seek to protect: 1. It is in the public interest for publishers and librarians to make available the widest diversity of views and expressions, including those that are unorthodox, unpopular, or considered dangerous by the majority. . . . 5. It is not in the public interest to force a reader to accept the prejudgment of a label characterizing any expression or its author as subversive or dangerous. . . . 7. It is the responsibility of publishers and librarians to give full meaning to the freedom to read by providing books that enrich the quality and diversity of thought and expression. By the exercise of this affirmative responsibility, they can demonstrate that the answer to a “bad” book is a good one, the answer to a “bad” idea is a good one. A call for professional neutrality extends to ALA Diversity Policy, as well, which states that “actions and programs to raise the awareness of library users to any problem or condition [related to prejudice or discrimination] . . . would not be in conflict with the Library Bill of Rights when they are free of any element of advocacy.”6 The Diversity Statement also says that “libraries must seek to provide an environment free of racism, where all are treated with respect and dignity,” calling for action rather than neutrality. This implies that words advocating hate can be essentially negated, or combated, with words that advocate tolerance, or words that present an opposite viewpoint. While neutrality is presented as an ideal in professional documents, Judith Krug (2006) explains that librarians are indeed torn on issues of free speech and intellectual freedom: “the individual librarian is the key to achieving the end result” (21) of true intellectual freedom. Krug and Morgan have not articulated an argument; rather, they are noting some of the problematic concepts and actions that precede the ability to develop sound premises. The ALA presents neutrality as the basis for ethical decision making, but the organization has no legal recourse for librarians who fail to uphold the FTR (contra that in England, where the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals holds the right to test librarians for ethical breaches). A final consideration is public libraries’ legal status regarding use of space: libraries have been designated as one of the few remaining limited public forums—designated spaces where free expression (within the limits of the law) can occur (see Gathegi 2005). The rarity of spaces designated as such has given librarians an almost sacrosanct duty, meaning that they nurture a space for free speech and for people to freely search for information. Because of the very explicitly stated professional obligation to uphold freedom to read, debate about the subject rarely surfaces within professional publications, especially those sanctioned by ALA. Freedom to read is celebrated (rightfully so) in terms of banned books and censorship by way of Internet filters, and meddlesome patrons are discussed (and sometimes ridiculed) on listservs. Pornography is the usual culprit; hate speech is rarely defended. The Social Responsibilities Round Table (SRRT), a round table of the American Library Association, established in 1969, is an exception to the rule. Questioning Library Neutrality (2008) offers a series of essays from the Progressive Librarian (a publication of the SRRT) that points out the inadequacy of the First Amendment in informing librarianship. The Library Bill of Rights, developed as a tool against wartime propaganda, says that a librarian should maintain neutrality. In the introduction to Questioning Library Neutrality, Allison Lewis (2008) writes, in regard to shelf space and collection-development funds, “What about viewpoints expressing neo-Nazi ideology or Holocaust denial? Do these deserve equal representation along with historical studies of World War II and personal stories of Holocaust survivors? . . . I would include some representation of [these] materials in an adult library collection, in order to understand their arguments and be better prepared to argue against them” (2). In other words, yes, controversial materials must be included, but so that by studying them an intelligent person might be better educated. One cannot, indeed, keep one’s head in the sand and expect to be able to discern good from bad or be able to effectively counter arguments made by someone advocating evil. The SRRT promotes ideals within ALA that explicitly promote social equality, which might mean abandoning neutrality in favor of finding ways to better achieve a more perfect democracy. This stance has been criticized within ALA as partisanship—that it violates the prescribed professional code. This presents a question: Are libraries spaces where all ideas should receive equal airtime? A Debate John Swan, representing the Intellectual Freedom Round Table, and Noel Peattie, representing the Social Responsibility Round Table, held a debate at ALA Annual 1988 titled “Two Views of Intellectual Freedom.” The debate is worth revisiting, in depth, because these scholars laid out the philosophical and legal paradox in question. At the center of the debate is a particular incident in 1984 in which David McCalden, leader of an anti-Semite and Holocaust-denial group, was scheduled as an exhibitor at the California Library Association (CLA). McCalden’s message carried both falsehoods and dangerous views.7 Due to protests, McCalden’s presentation was cancelled, his space in the exhibit hall was revoked, and he sued, citing breach of contract (Swan and Peattie 1989, 5). The case was finally settled in 1992 when the Supreme Court let stand a 1990 court of appeals decision in McCalden’s favor.8 The CLA debacle framed a debate between Swan and Peattie that explored the moral responsibility of librarians to people who have suffered injustices. Alasdaire MacIntyre (2006) offers a powerful corrective to the kind of claims that the likes of McCalden espouse: “Moral agents have to understand themselves as accountable, not only in their roles, but also as rational individuals. . . . For each role there is a range of particular others, to whom, if they fail in their responsibilities, they owe an account that either excuses or admits to the offense and accepts the consequences” (191). In the debate, Swan said that people seek books that lead them toward greater truth, and librarians should not claim to be the arbiters of that truth: “As librarians our cause is, in a very practical sense, not truth but freedom. Indeed, our truth is freedom, freedom of access, freedom for our patrons to draw upon our resources, to sort their own truths out of our carefully collected and managed mélange of truths, half-truths, untruths, and nontruths” (Swan and Peattie 1989, 3). Untruths, in fact, prevailed in Nazi Germany when the totalitarian government shut down debate (8). That said, Swan freely admitted to choosing and rejecting publications, as it is neither possible nor desirable to put every publication on the shelves (included in his reject pile were extremist publications). He said that the tension about inclusion “should be part of the critical awareness of every professional” (32). Swan’s argument is that by giving people choices about what they can read, they can make up their own minds about what is good. Peattie countered Swan by asking: “What is the moral responsibility of librarians for highly controversial materials in their collections? And how do we deal with the person who demands free speech for groups holding theories, which, if they prevailed in the body politic, would diminish or destroy free speech?” (Swan and Peattie 1989, 38). Are some ideas so dangerous that they could overpower those that are reasonable? Is there an excuse for having books in the collection that cause outrage among groups of people who have suffered through bigotry or genocide? As we will see below, Western European legal structures tend to include laws against hate speech on those grounds. Peattie pointed out that he and Swan were in almost complete agreement about intellectual freedom; it was in their opinions regarding the Big Lie (referring to Hitler’s appeal to the Germans to exterminate the Jews) in which they differed: “In the few cases where we would disagree, sharply or cautiously, it would be where the speaker, film, or book, defended something that wasn’t so, and which would hurt a lot of people if it came to be generally believed that was so” (68). Peattie extends the premise of the Big Lie to the pain that other minorities (“blacks, women, many other people”) experience in the face of bigotry, emphasizing that if a lie is told “often enough, loud enough” and demands equal time in airplay and advertising, many people will believe it. It is an “untruth” that certain people are subhuman—that “it is all right to push them around, to discriminate against them . . . to exterminate them” (50). A rhetorical criticism of the debate is that both Swan and Peattie operate on presumptions: Swan’s is that the library is a mechanism through which truth can be attained; Peattie’s, that libraries and librarians can make the correct choice regarding contentious ideas. Swan purports that materials provoke public discourse, while Peattie says that librarians can lead the public to accept right arguments. This could, therefore, be conceived of as an argument of classical liberalism versus paternalism. Peattie’s intention, though, is not to advocate for a paternal informational state but instead for one that restricts the proliferation of ideas that have the potential to cause great harm. Swan and Peattie both have the same goal (greater societal understanding), but they espouse different means. In the end, Swan won the debate with 76 votes to Peattie’s 26 (with 26 abstaining). Enter the Internet The Internet’s entrance into the library changed (and challenged) many librarians’ commitment to intellectual freedom. Suddenly libraries were far less able to control the materials that came in (remember that Swan said that it was impractical to include everything, and extremist materials were easy to discard. The Internet, though, made it quite possible to include all ideas). The ALA fervently defended full access to the Internet while fighting the Communications Decency Act before the Supreme Court in Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union and while opposing the Children’s Internet Protection Act in United States v. American Library Association. 9 In short, legislators wanted filters on computers in public spaces such as libraries, and ALA did not. Individual librarians, though, did not necessarily subscribe to ALA’s dictum. There are several grounds for disagreement. First, the original definition of pornography (at the heart of the Internet filtering debate) included recognition of “community standards”; there is a tradition of having local control over library materials (especially racy materials). Pornography, viewed openly in public spaces, can be disturbing because the material does not meet community standards. Additionally, some online pornographic material is indeed illegal. Librarians seeking federal funds through the e-rate must ensure a safe atmosphere in the library, and installing filters is an easy way to do so, at least at face value. Of course, doing so is problematic; many filters exclude legal material on the basis of ideology, which is precisely what librarians, taking into account First Amendment principles, strive to avoid (Nadel 2000). The aforementioned arguments focus on pornography, though. The problem remains that the Internet allows bad ideas (such as hate speech) to flourish, and Internet filters may or may not identify and sequester hate speech. As an aside, the Anti-Defamation League did create a “hate filter,” as Pamela Mendels reported in the New York Times (November 11, 1998), but it is no longer available. Public Space Defining the legal status of library space might help clarify its relationship to free expression. John N. Gathegi (2005), prompted by the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), explains that the Supreme Court missed a chance to clarify the legal status held by public libraries’ space. He purports that not only is the designation as a limited public forum (that can be “under the managerial control of the government”) inappropriate but a traditional analysis of the space as a public forum is irrelevant; public libraries should be, as the space for the public’s deepening relationship with the First Amendment, firmly rooted as a true public forum. Public forums (streets, parks, and sidewalks) are spaces in which free speech may not be curtailed (barring it being unreasonably disruptive). Limited public forums have restrictions based on the user’s purpose in the space. This was the basis of ALA’s lawsuit over CIPA; CIPA requires libraries to limit access to information on the basis of content, which violates the First Amendment. Various libraries had won CIPA cases in district courts, but the Supreme Court upheld CIPA’s constitutionality on the grounds that federal funding for libraries is to “provide for educational and informational purposes . . . [not] illegal and harmful pornography.”10 Thus, the Court defined the purpose based on assumptions about who may use the space. This clarification of space is important because of its paradox based on intention: courtroom rhetoric demonstrates that CIPA’s purpose is to limit access to pornography and obscenity. “Harmful to minors” is, therefore, related not to speech that incites people to harm others but to obscene materials that degrades the moral integrity of a minor. There are also feminist arguments against pornography stating that it is created with the intention of disempowering women, often through actual violence (MacKinnon 1985). We can extrapolate from such writings that there is a good argument against having such materials in public spaces on the basis of harm. The library’s space as a public, or limited public, forum is also an argument based on some of the same kinds of presumptions that plague the Swan v. Peattie debate. Moreover, the very idea of a limited public forum contains inherent confusion about audience. There is a tacit notion that a definable audience exists, but the definition is never explicit or clear. Gathegi’s (2005) argument that the public library is a public forum—“an essential component of the marketplace of ideas” (10)—is good as long as the law provides protections for the vulnerable in public spaces. If the library has the legal designation as a public forum and people are harmed within the space of the library, what do legal rhetors say? Legal Rhetoric Legal elements of free expression are likewise paradoxical and have a fairly lengthy history. Legal scholars also differ in their judgments related to free expression. One jurist, Richard Posner (2003), states unequivocally, “There is no reason to expect the scope of the First Amendment freedoms to remain constant” (364). He adds, “But nothing in history suggests that modest curtailments of these forms of expression interfere with or threaten ‘democracy’ understood realistically not as the activity of a debating society but as a competition among members of the political elite for electoral support” (367). The rhetoric of Posner’s text is a complex one. For one thing, his position is one of legal pragmatics, which he separates completely from philosophical pragmatics. The different usages of “pragmatic” can be a source of definitional and practical confusion. Any proposition that is being considered, including (or, for him, especially) one of legal principle, should be guided not by metaphysics but by anticipated consequences. His pragmatism is unlike that of any philosopher and is bound by the actions of people in social and legal situations. This limitation can only be called his own personal pragmatism. The exclusion of philosophy affects his stance relating to freedom of expression. It also affects his means of expressing the problem. In Booth’s (2004) conception, Posner may even be said to employ antirhetoric; his position is, in the extremes of his writings, deterministic. His anticipation only of consequences is ahistorical, which renders his rhetoric incapable of absorbing historical context into conclusions about free expression. While arguing that the scope of the First Amendment is malleable, Posner (2003) also reduces the boundaries of consequences (important though they may be): “Recognizing that pragmatism and consequentialism are not synonyms, the pragmatic judge will be sensitive to other considerations, besides consequences, that are important to people (and to judges!), including deep, durable emotional reactions to practices such as child pornography, the bad consequences of which (at least when children are not used in the manufacture of the pornography) have not been demonstrated” (364). Posner, in his relativist argument, uses an example of offensive art. A judge may rule that the art is immune from censorship, that it has no protection, or that a judge must balance merits, demerits, qualities, and faults in deciding on its status. “Each of these choices has as much, or as little, grounding in the text and history of the First Amendment, and in considerations of institutional competence, as any of the others” (Posner 1990, 47–48). Posner, in effect, agrees with the possibility of content-neutral restrictions, such as restrictions to speech acts that interfere with the ability of people to conduct their business or go about their daily duties. These kinds of acts can be constrained, not because of their content but because of material effects that the action has have with regard to others. (Resolution of the challenge may well depend, referring back to Gathegi [2005], on whether the library is a public forum or a limited public forum.) Blocking a busy intersection of streets in a city can be restricted not because of what people are saying but because of the disruption to the flow of traffic and people. The government might make exceptions by issuing permits—for instance, a Veteran’s Day parade may be permitted, or a neo-Nazi march in Skokie, Illinois. The idea is akin to the creation of a story, one with very different protagonists (and antagonists). In fact, the scenario necessitates that democracy itself is antagonistic. The state of not only the opinions of legal scholars but also case law indicates that the stories, the narratives, are not consistent. One cannot predict outcomes by reading only a few instances of cases or scholarly positions. Posner, for example, is clear in his position, but his position is not the sole one to consider. Posner is not the only legal scholar who objects to First Amendment absolutism. The denial of an absolute is a particular narrative tactic. In a sense, it is not positive, insofar as it argues in favor of limitations to free expression; the point of contention rests on the locus and kinds of limitations. Jeremy Waldron (2012) offers a different tactic from that employed by Posner. The latter may also be explained as a negative discursive usage, though the concern is placed on what cannot be considered, constrained, or restricted. In a recent book, Waldron (2012), to support his position, claims, “First, there is a sort of public good of inclusiveness that our society sponsors and that it is committed to. . . . Hate speech undermines this public good, or it makes the task of sustaining it much more difficult than it would otherwise be” (4). His objection is not a personal one; that is, it is not based on speech directed at an individual. In a very real sense, Waldron himself is examining the potential of rhetoric. His attention is on effects of speech acts on groups. Specifically, hate speech targets groups in ways that set them apart from the polity in ways that can cause harm manifest in social, political, economic, and other material ways. Waldron attempts to lend logic to freedom of expression that is intended to make application consistent with a coherent set of objectives that have fairness and equity at their core. His position is not shared by many US legal scholars; he genuinely believes that hate speech does palpable harm to people. He claims that “the harm done to individuals and groups through the disfiguring of our social environment by visible, public, and semi-permanent announcements to the effect that in the opinion of one group in the community, perhaps the majority, members of another group are not worthy of equal citizenship” (Waldron 2012, 33). In short, some speech should not be tolerated. The rhetoric is vastly different from that of many other scholars. In fact, at the heart of Waldron’s (2012) stance is rhetoric itself: “Tiny impacts of millions of actions—each apparently inconsiderable in itself—can produce a large-scale toxic effect that, even at the mass level, operates insidiously as a sort of slow-acting poison, and that regulations have to be aimed at individual actions with that scale and that pace of causation in mind. An immense amount of progress has been made in consequentialist moral philosophy by taking causation of this kind, on this scale and at this pace, properly into account” (97). We must conclude that neutrality is hardly possible in the face of hate speech; indeed, neutrality does not exist in the context of any kinds of expression. There may be specific dangers in allowing hate speech, at least according to Waldron. The narrative he constructs is at odds with those of others in that he eliminates protection that some would accord to all speech. Some forms of expression, because of material effects on human beings, should not be tolerated; his is a somewhat heterodox point of view. The overarching sense of opposition to censorship is not universal, as Waldron’s narrative indicates. As Ursula Owen (2000) points out, many countries in Europe have opted to condemn hate speech because research has found that “racism increased as democracy expanded. . . . [and that] the problem of hate speech surely is that it can go beyond its immediate targets and create a culture of hate, a culture which then gives permission to hate on a much wider scale” (6–7). Owen concludes that it is the library’s role, though, not to silence any voice but to educate citizens about the value of, and rights to, free expression. Is education the best solution, or should hate speech be curtailed? Where do libraries draw a line (if there is a line to be drawn) to create a space for civility? Must civility include effort directed at discovering truth? Waldron’s viewpoint is not widely shared, so we have yet another paradox in the legal arena in the United States. Disagreements with Waldron abound. C. Edwin Baker (1997) takes a position of defense of the First Amendment against almost all comers. He applies his defense even to hate speech, saying that even a racist must be free to express opinions: “Law’s purposeful restrictions on her racist or hate speech violate her formal autonomy” (Baker 2008, 5). The autonomy viewpoint holds, contra Waldron, that it is individuals who must be at the center of freedom of expression. The group-individual distinction is a potentially irreconcilable one since each stance begins from a starting point that is radically different from the other. It must be noted, though, that Baker’s (2011) conception of autonomy is by no means simplistic; his narrative is more subtle and nuanced than Waldron suggests. In short, there are two distinct presumptions, so there will likely be distinct conclusions. In the formal conception, autonomy consists of a person’s authority (or right) to make decisions about herself—her own meaningful actions and usually her use of her resources—as long as her actions do not block others’ similar authority or rights. This formal autonomy in relation to one’s self does not include any right to exercise power over others. It does, however, encompass self-expressive rights that include, for example, a right to seek to persuade or unite or associate with others—or to offend, expose, condemn, or disassociate with them (Baker 2011, 254). Baker’s concern is to communicate a democracy-based framework in which agreed-upon definitions of autonomy can be applied. As might be expected in the present analysis, though, his stance is not universally agreed upon. Any Middle Ground? When we are faced with two such seemingly contradictory ideas in a human action as important as the law, we must seek reconciliation, and we must do so in ways that are similar to readers of fiction who are trying to make sense out of complex text. One reaction to the contradiction is to find one position or the other to be irrational. For instance, can we have completely free expression while proscribing some kinds of speech? Can we allow harm to some individuals or groups under the rationale of an inviolate claim of certainty? Can a narrative sustain holding both beliefs? Thus far the discussions are limited to the kinds of expressions that may be debated openly; a different class of expression can enter into consideration, as Thomas Scanlon mentions (1977). He says that there are instances where, for example, a bank robber hands a note to a teller that threatens violence if money is not handed over. There can be little doubt about the exceptional nature of such speech, and it cannot be tolerated, no matter what one’s pervasive theory of free expression may be. Suppose the note also includes a discourse on the political reason for the robbery; does this make a difference in theory? It may not be a stretch to say that speech may be restricted because of national security. This instance would entail the government determining both the nature of the expression in question and the kind of communication associated with it. Scanlon suggests a partial narrative theory, founded in part on John Stuart Mill’s suggested limitations to expression. “When the situation is grave and the price of disorder enormous [such as a bank robbery] . . . utilitarian considerations may give the government’s commands very real binding force. But continuing rule on this basis would be acceptable only for a society in permanent crisis” (Scanlon 2003, 25). Scanlon raises concerns that can also be examined in other ways. Speech can take many forms, and the government may be connected in some ways to many instantiations of the expressions, albeit indirectly. That connection may be manifest in ways that primarily feature the speaker. In short, precisely what kinds of speech should be protected? The scholars mentioned above address this question in different ways. Cass Sunstein (1993) adds yet another perspective in his narrative treatment. While many concentrate on social implications for speech, Sunstein is more concerned with political ramifications. What may be most influential about his idea is that he is not a constructivist when it comes to the First Amendment; Sunstein maintains that our understanding of the First Amendment should not be limited by what might be construed as the intentions of those who drafted it (xv). He states that, as he sees it, freedom of expression most assuredly covers political speech, the ability of people to proclaim opinions and beliefs about matters of public importance. What is not part of the original interpretation of the First Amendment is the immense expansion both of commercial types of expression and additional law that affects speech. He states: “The marketplace [of speech] is made possible only by legal rules, and a system of markets in expression makes it possible to exclude, through law, many people who would very much like to speak and be heard” (55). According to this story, free speech is not, in fact, free. Sunstein is attempting to situate free speech within a body of political fact. Ronald Dworkin (2006), presenting yet another narrative, opts for a legitimacy position, rather than the autonomy one of Baker. This is, essentially, a political stance. He says, “It is unfair to impose a collective decision on someone who has not been allowed to contribute to that moral environment, by expressing his political or social convictions or tastes or prejudices informally” (131). He also acknowledges that there are regulations that affect expression and the reception of messages (something there is not space here to address). Dworkin (2002) concludes that regulations “deliberately aim at changing public opinion in some way. They do not aim that the public reach a different overall verdict in any particular election. But since they attack what they take to be defects in the formation of public opinion, they do aim that the content of public opinion be different from what it would otherwise have been” (359). There is then a consequence that arises from the structural positioning of regulation and political action, and the consequence may not operate to the benefit of a substantial minority of the population. A major concern that is related to Dworkin’s warning is the recent US Supreme Court case, Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission.11 The decision in the case results in an extended narrative of decision, justices’ opinion, and interpretations, and unanimity, rhetorically, is nowhere to be found: “The Court has also ruled that the constitutional free speech protections are afforded a ‘speaker’ independent of its identity as a person or corporation. Therefore, if a corporation cannot be prohibited from spending its funds on ‘political advertising’ then its officers and employees cannot be prohibited from spending or authorizing the spending of political subdivision funds” (Sandoval and Avila 2011, 267). The rhetoric of the Court even perverts the definition of “person” (a falsehood is created). Justice John Paul Stevens, in a dissenting opinion, wrote: The basic premise underlying the Court’s ruling is its iteration, and constant reiteration, of the proposition that the First Amendment bars regulatory distinctions based on a speaker’s identity, including its “identity” as a corporation. While that glittering generality has rhetorical appeal, it is not a correct statement of the law. Nor does it tell us when a corporation may engage in electioneering that some of its shareholders oppose. It does not even resolve the specific question whether Citizens United may be required to finance some of its messages with the money in its PAC. The conceit that corporations must be treated identically to natural persons in the political sphere is not only inaccurate but also inadequate to justify the Court’s disposition of this case.12 Discussion One of the primary objectives of this project is to demonstrate that dilemmas such as those of freedom of expression are analyzable according to a number of methodologies. Within librarianship and legal scholarship it must be recognized that a valuable methodology (although one that is underused) is examination by means of narrative explication. This method assists with the definition and comprehension not only of the challenges themselves (e.g., at this point it is hoped that readers have a deeper understanding of the many facets of freedom of expression and the lack of consensus on the matter) but also of the various ways the rhetorical analyses are constructed. Librarianship holds its own narratives that illustrate the paradox of free speech. The stories told by librarians, library historians, and academics regarding censorship provide insight about the purposes of libraries. The library has been privileged in the past with great support from communities, philanthropists, and the government because it was seen as a social good—a “temple of knowledge . . . reinvented as a place of advancement for all the people—a physical confirmation of the values of the Revolution” (Stielow 2001, 4). In the past, communities supported libraries in large part because it was perceived that they fulfilled an educational role. Sidney Ditzion (1947, 22) discussed the explicit connection between schools and libraries: “This connection was both a self-evident truth and a convenient piece of logic. . . . What indeed could be more convincing than to point out to a state legislature or a city council that the seeds of knowledge had been sown by their hands and that the plant must now be looked after and encouraged to bear good fruit?” The traditional conception of libraries’ educational achievements must constantly be reevaluated. Ideally, libraries would produce better (more moral, more educated) people who would thus be able to contribute to the American democracy. When the dangers of fascism and its concomitant dogmatism arose in the 1930s, librarians saw a new purpose in protecting intellectual freedom, and the result was ALA’s first draft of the Library Bill of Rights (LBR) in 1938 (passed in 1939). The LBR marks a juncture for ALA, though Frederick Stielow (2001) says “that crucial document for the library’s future devotion to the First Amendment may only have passed as a part of wartime fervor” (10). Krug and Morgan (2010) cite challenges to The Grapes of Wrath as impetus to write the LBR, though at first the LBR “focused on unbiased book selection, a balanced collection, and open meeting rooms” (16). It was not until 1971 that it added a “Resolution on Challenged Materials,” which instructed librarians not to remove materials unless, in court, they “were found to be outside the protection of the first amendment” (16). Librarians regularly and passionately defend challenged materials, though few stories about censorship describe challenges to hate materials. Narratives either explicitly or implicitly suggest that something akin to First Amendment absolutism is the most effective practice for the profession. In other words, there are “safe” topics within librarianship to address the free speech question—areas that do not challenge the possibility of absolutism because the law is clear; racy literature does not pose the same threat to democracy as hate speech. By contrast, legal opinion, at the very least, includes some mention of potential damage done by hate speech. This is not to say that there is universal agreement or even widespread policy recommendations for the creation of new law. In the absence of agreement and recommendations, the legal system is left with an enormous degree of power resting in the hands of individual judges and justices. It is they who are left with the responsibility to interpret matters of free expression. We have managed to keep our messy republic, but how long can we do so? Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson (2013), speaking on civility, dissent, and democracy, emphasize the importance of creating a healthier body politic through civil engagement. Limiting speech by law is not the key to civility. Instead, people must be taught to listen to others and compromise—education and an insistence on civility in discourse (by the people) is the key. Politics is and must be “agonistic” (see Mouffe 2013); there is a long history of invective and insult, but is it more polarizing, more ubiquitous, and more damaging today? Unfortunately, incivility is very common in newspapers, broadcast programming, and virtual media. Libraries are spaces where all legal speech can occur, but we have a responsibility, not legally enforced or enforceable, to develop spaces that encourage civility and healthy debate. This means strengthening the educational mission of the institution. We must also recapture the mind-set of compromise necessary to the retention of the republic. Democracy requires nothing less, even as free speech is unequivocally preserved. The point of this article is that free speech must be retained; the widest spectrum of viewpoints must be accessible, as Gutmann urges, even as speakers embrace the need for compromise so as to challenge the status quo. Will the paradox presented in this article be resolved within either the law or librarianship any time soon? The literature on legal philosophy suggests that no ultimate answer is forthcoming. The questions asked at the outset of this article remain open questions; we have presented a unique means by which they may further be addressed.