Introduction Libraries as social and cultural institutions have much to contribute to the development of their nation’s information infrastructure. National union catalogs (NUCs) are essential tools in this process in that they compile national information resources, make possible cooperation and resource sharing between libraries, and serve the information needs of users. Building on the findings from a larger study of the development of information infrastructures (of which the NUC is an essential component) in four Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) countries—Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, and Poland [1, 2]—this article compares the development of NUCs in these four countries plus three others, Estonia, Latvia, and South Africa. Despite the geographic distance, libraries in CEE, the Baltic region, and South Africa share many elements in common. These countries have all undergone vast transformations due to the sociopolitical changes that started in the early 1990s. The CEE and Baltic countries were faced with the task of moving their economies and societies from the former socialist regime toward free market and liberalization. South Africa saw its race‐based apartheid system crumble and replaced by a more egalitarian system. Libraries, like all other institutions, were affected by the social, political, and economic transformations [3]. Besides the political and economic changes, these seven countries were faced with the need to update their technological infrastructure and modernize their library system. In the last decade, funding agencies, including Western library‐oriented philanthropic foundations, have invested time, effort, and money in helping various infrastructures of the economy rebuild in these countries. Higher education institutions and their libraries have benefited to various degrees from these initiatives (expertise, resources, training, integrated library systems), although much remains to be done [3]. Beyond the automation of internal and external processes of individual libraries, there has been a trend toward cooperation and resource sharing. The early stages of the development of a national union catalog coincided in many countries with the establishment of the foundations for interlibrary cooperation. All seven countries studied have started their union catalogs in the last decade (in the case of South Africa, the union catalog was initiated in 1983 but was substantially revamped in 1997), and, while the NUCs are at various stages of development, they are all operational, thanks to funding and support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, state agencies, and other sources that made possible these nationwide initiatives. The national union catalogs that are investigated in this article include the following:3 a) NUKAT, the Polish National Union Catalog b) MOKKA, the Hungarian Shared Catalog c) CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic d) The Slovak Union Catalogs of Periodicals and of Monographs e) The Latvian Union Catalog f) ESTER, the Estonian union catalog g) SACat, the South African union database. The assumption of this article is that the development of NUCs follows different trajectories based on the nature of the relationships between individual libraries in the country and the interaction between libraries and other actors such as system vendors, users, consultants, professional societies, or grant donors. These case studies shed light on the social shaping of an artifact, such as the NUC, by addressing the process of establishing consortia and help to identify differences and similarities between projects and across cultures. The key question investigated in this article is how much of the development of national union catalogs was influenced by choices that were not technical: libraries may have different visions (or “philosophies”) for a NUC based on the social context of the libraries, the solutions that they feel they need to adopt, the difficulties they may encounter, and their cultural practices. The varieties of coalitions and their respective visions and choices have an impact on the conception and design of a national union catalog. 3.  A special mention is to be made regarding the existence of other types of union catalogs, which are based on consortia of libraries using a common library system, or a group of libraries in geographical proximity (or even parallel union catalog projects at the national level, such as the virtual union catalog KaRo in Poland). These are important efforts—and sometimes more successfully negotiated than the national union catalogs, but they are not the topic of this article. Method The term “Central and Eastern Europe” is used here to refer to the region of Europe that was under Soviet control until 1989. Data were collected in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland. These countries have similar levels of economic development and are at an advanced stage of socioeconomic and political reforms. They are also implementing technological change at a rapid pace. Complementary data were collected in Slovakia. Although Slovakia has encountered more difficulties in its social and political transformations than the other three countries, it was important to include it in the study because of its historical relationship with the Czech Republic (they became distinct nations in 1993) and its involvement in the Czech and Slovak Library and Information Network (CASLIN), which provided the foundation for the establishment of union catalogs in both countries. The bulk of the data in the four CEE countries were collected between March and June 1999 in the form of in‐depth interviews in which a broad agenda of research questions was explored in a fairly open‐ended way. The purpose was to gather narratives from the respondents about their perceptions and framing of the role of libraries in developing national information infrastructures (understood as a mixture of content, institutions, and technologies) [1, 4]. In the process, cooperative projects were addressed and, in particular, the development of national union catalogs (CASLIN in Czech Republic and Slovakia, MOKKA in Hungary, and NUKAT in Poland). Face‐to‐face interviews were conducted with 49 library leaders and policy makers in thirty‐seven Central and Eastern European institutions—a 50 percent sample (ten in Czech Republic, ten in Hungary, thirteen in Poland, and four in Slovakia). A dozen less formal discussions with other respondents, library vendors, and project managers were also undertaken in an attempt to retrace the dynamics and rationale for the building of cooperative projects (including NUCs) in each country [5]. The data collected in 1999 were updated and complemented by additional data on the progress of NUC projects in these four countries. The new data were collected in 2002 through follow‐up interviews with selected respondents and from the projects’ Web sites (when available). The Baltic countries of Latvia and Estonia, much like the four CEE countries, underwent sociopolitical transformations starting in the early 1990s. Data on the initiation, development, and maintenance of the NUC efforts were collected in Latvia and Estonia in 2002 through structured telephone interviews (four respondents in Latvia and five in Estonia). A trip to South Africa was undertaken in May 2002 to discuss SACat, the South African national union database. Nine face‐to‐face interviews and two telephone interviews were arranged with key respondents from major university and research libraries, as well as the service provider (Sabinet Online) that is involved in the management of the union catalog. The basis for selection of the respondents is that they had an extensive involvement in the development of the NUC and/or held significant policy positions (e.g., library directors or associate directors, heads of consortia, project managers). The language of the interviews was primarily English. The services of a translator were required in two cases (one in Slovakia and one in Hungary). The completion of the interviews took between sixty and ninety minutes. The questions addressed policy and implementation issues by asking what respondents see as the most significant issues surrounding the development of a national union catalog for their country, what choices were made in their specific institution, what were the group dynamics and social networks characterizing the development of the NUC in their country, and what are their reflections and assessments of the overall process. E‐mail and follow‐up telephone interviews were undertaken to clarify various points. The coding and analysis of the data encompassed the content (identification of major themes), as well as the language and narrative forms used by respondents in an attempt to convey how respondents framed and expressed issues that mattered to them. Direct quotes from respondents are provided throughout the article. Finally, a short survey on the architecture, functionalities, and organizational aspects of the NUCs was sent by e‐mail to the union catalog coordinators and/or managers in each of the seven countries. The results of this survey are displayed in tables 1–4. Table 1 Architecture of the Union Catalogs across Countries Architecture Cataloging Library System(s) CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic Centralized database Locally, then uploading, or in central database via http protocol Cubus (Czech) Union Catalogs of Slovakia Two separate databases (for serials and monographs); both centralized Centrally Aleph MOKKA (Hungary) Centralized database Locally, then uploading (in batch or real time) Corvina NUKAT (Poland) Centralized database Centrally, then download to local database (option to do it locally, too) VTLS Virtua Latvia Union Catalog Centralized database Centrally, then download to local database Aleph500, Liber ESTER (Estonia) Two separate databases (in Tallinn and in Tartu); both centralized Centrally, then download to local database Innopac (moving to Millennium) SACat (South Africa) Centralized database New records are cataloged on OCLC Worldcat and then downloaded into SACat (then into local catalogs) Innopac (Sitesearch: reference; DRSS: ILL) Note.—DRSS = distributed resource sharing software; ILL = interlibrary loan. Table 2 Functionalities of the Union Catalogs across Countries Purpose of the Union Catalog Content Key Dates MARC Format CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic Shared cataloging, ILL, resource discovery, item localization (at various stages of implementation) Separate union catalogs for monographs and periodicals 1999–2000 (inception of project: 1995) UNIMARC Union Catalogs of Slovakia Shared cataloging, resource discovery, item localization Separate catalogs for monographs and periodicals 1999–2000 UNIMARC MOKKA (Hungary) Shared cataloging (with plans for resource discovery and ILL) Monographs only Start date: 1997; database: 2002 HUNMARC, USMARC NUKAT (Poland) Source of authority records and shared cataloging; plans for resource discovery, item localization, ILL Monographs (periodicals planned for September 2002) Inaugurated in June 2002 USMARC (MARC 21) Latvia Union Catalog Resource discovery, item localization, shared cataloging Shared union catalog Inaugurated in March 2000 USMARC (MARC 21) ESTER (Estonia) Resource discovery, item localization, shared cataloging, joint acquisition (plans for ILL) Shared union catalog Inaugurated in January 1999 MARC 21 SACat (South Africa) Shared cataloging, ILL, resource discovery, item localization Shared union catalog Started in 1983–84; revamped in 1997 USMARC Table 3 Functionalities of the Union Catalogs across Countries (Continued) Cataloging Rules Bibliographic Description Classification Scheme and Subject Headings National Authority Control CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic AACR2 ISBD UDC, LCSH Not at the moment Union Catalogs of Slovakia AACR2 ISBD UDC, LCSH Not at the moment MOKKA (Hungary) AACR2 Hungarian standards, based on ISBD, IFLA, and/or RAK UDC, LCSH, MeSH, locally developed subject schemes Not at the moment NUKAT (Poland) Polish cataloging rules consistent with IFLA Polish standards consistent with ISBD LCC, UDC, three subject heading systems: KABA; Polish National Library SH; MeSH Yes: union authority file for names and uniform titles and for KABA (SH) Latvia Union Catalog AACR2 ISBD UDC, LCSH Yes, but localized ESTER (Estonia) AACR2 ISBD UDC, Estonian Universal Thesaurus, subject index of INGRID Yes (lists of equivalencies) SACat (South Africa) AACR2 AACR2r + LCRI Not any particular one is prescribed; DDC, LC, UDC, LCSH, MeSH Yes Note.—RAK = German standard for bibliographic description; SH = subject headings. Table 4 Organizational Structure of the Union Catalogs across Countries Maintainer of Database Organizational Structure Constitution Participating Libraries Financing CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic Czech National Library (Union Catalogue Department) No formal association or consortium 1) Union Catalog Task Team (1995–)2) R&D team (1997–2000)3) Expert ouncil (2001–) 60 libraries Top‐down: Czech Ministry of Culture Union Catalogs of Slovakia Monographs: Slovak National Library; periodicals: University Library in Bratislava Union Catalog approved by Slovak Library Law 183/2000; no formal association or consortium 1) Coordination committee2) Working groups Mandatory participation for all academic, research and public libraries Top‐down: Slovak Ministry of Culture MOKKA (Hungary) National Széchényi Library (project management and technical support) MOKKA Association (founder and owner); no legal ground 1) General assembly2) Three‐member presidium3) Expert group 15 (NL, 10 academic, 3 research, 1 public) Top‐down (grants, Ministry of National Cultural Heritage, etc.) NUKAT (Poland) NUKAT Center of Warsaw University Library Agreement among informal group of Polish academic libraries and the national library 1) NUKAT coordinating group2) Several task forces 28 (2 public, 3 research, 23 academic) Top‐down: (Polish Ministry of Education; State Committee for Scientific Research (KBN); Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Latvia Union Catalog National Library of Latvia Latvian Information Network (LINC) Consortium established in 1997 1) Board of regents2) Executive council3) Board of library directors4) Working groups 8 academic and research libraries Top‐down: mix of government and foreign sources (Soros, Mellon, USIA, DBI, etc.) ESTER (Estonia) National Library (Tallinn); Tartu University Library (Tartu) Estonian Libraries Network Consortium (ELNET) established in 1996 1) Board2) General assembly3) Executive management4) Expert groups 12 (NL, 8 academic, 2 public, 1 deposit) Mix of membership fees, government funding, Mellon grants SACat (South Africa) Sabinet Online (service provider) Owned by Sabinet (nonprofit organization): participating institutions are shareholders; subcontracted to Sabinet Online 1) Board2) Sabinet Online3) Standards committee Nearly 500 (academic, government, provincial, special libs). Bottom‐up: membership fees from participating libraries (subscription) Note.—USIA = U.S. Information Agency; DBI = Deutsches Bibliothesinstitut (Berlin); NL = National Library. A Framework for Comparing NUCs across Countries National union catalogs are the result of the work of many types of actors (system vendors, library technical experts, catalogers, users, or more specialized actors—consultants, professional societies, grant donors, etc.). At the heart of the building of national union catalogs is a set of strategies based on who makes the decisions, whose interests are taken into account, the influence of the type of technology, which formats to use, the characteristics of the players and their network, and so forth. Three factors, in particular, are essential to the development of a national union catalog: (1) the technical aspects, (2) the “philosophical” aspects, and (3) the organizational aspects. The technical aspects relate to the choices made about the library system, standards, and protocols; the architecture of the union catalog; and the cataloging procedures, along with decisions about the content and purpose of the union catalog. The so‐called philosophical aspects, to use a term used by a few respondents, refer to the visions (shared or not shared by the various libraries) of what the union catalog should accomplish (i.e., its functionalities) and how it fits within the overall information infrastructure of the country. Finally, the organizational aspects address such issues as Who will build the union catalog? Who will own it? Who will operate and maintain it? Who will finance it? [6–8]. Scope of the NUCs Tables 1–4 summarize the various choices made in each country with regard to the architecture, functionalities, and organizational structure of the national union catalogs. The scope of the union catalogs in the seven countries varies from one country to another. At the time of the study, Poland's and Hungary’s union catalogs covered monographs only (periodicals were planned for integration into Poland’s NUKAT starting in 2002; as for Hungary, the National Széchényi Library maintains a separate computerized union catalog for foreign periodicals). The Czech Republic's and Slovakia’s union catalogs cover monographs and periodicals. In addition to monographs and periodicals, the union catalogs of South Africa, Estonia, and Latvia cover a broader range of materials, which include visual materials, maps, music scores, sound recordings, video files, computer files, archival materials, and so on. There does not seem to be any clearly stated policy as to what is included or what is not included in the union catalogs. This decision depends largely on the participating libraries in each country. Generally, the NUC consists of a compilation of the circulation databases of member libraries along with the national bibliography compiled by national libraries. The number of participating libraries fluctuates from eight academic and research libraries in Latvia to several hundred academic, government, provincial, and special libraries in South Africa. Participation in the union catalog efforts is mandatory for all academic, public, and research libraries in Slovakia, but this is not the case elsewhere: twenty‐eight libraries participate in the NUC efforts in Poland, twelve in Estonia, fifteen in Hungary, and sixty libraries in the Czech Republic. These numbers have to be understood in context, though. In Hungary, for instance, the combined holdings of the fifteen MOKKA member libraries account for 70 percent of all foreign titles available in Hungary and close to 100 percent of all Hungarian titles. Most libraries have opted for foreign systems, with the exception of Czech Republic and Hungary, which are both using local library systems: the CASLIN‐Union Catalog of the Czech Republic has been experimenting with the Cubus system, which was developed by a Czech firm and tailored to suit the union catalog’s specific needs. Hungary’s MOKKA initially signed an agreement with a major foreign vendor, but later opted for the Corvina system sold by a German‐Hungarian firm. Along with foreign systems, foreign standards were unanimously adopted in the countries studied. The most common one is USMARC (since renamed MARC21). The Czech and Slovak Republics opted for UNIMARC (a decision made during the CASLIN period). In Hungary, some respondents were vehement about keeping HUNMARC rather than moving toward USMARC or UNIMARC, although these were better supported by foreign library systems. The rationale for keeping HUNMARC was best expressed by this respondent: “It is good that the country maintains its distinctiveness.” Ultimately, it was decided that MOKKA would support both HUNMARC and USMARC, allowing conversion between the two formats. Other standards commonly used across countries are AACR2 for cataloging; ISBD for bibliographic description; UDC for classification; and LCSH or MeSH for subject headings, alongside locally developed schemes. NUKAT and SACat seem to be further along in terms of developing authority control. NUKAT also functions as a union authority file. At the time of the study, the Slovak union catalogs and Hungary’s MOKKA had plans to introduce authority records. Estonia and Latvia had lists of equivalencies or localized authority records. Composition and Dynamics of the Players Paying sole attention to the data shown in tables 1–4, however, does not do justice to the process and dynamics that led to the specific decisions and outcomes in each country. By interviewing people who contributed their vision and participated in the decision‐making process, one can draw a more complex and realistic picture of the shaping of a NUC. The difficulties in developing a national union catalog reside in the fact that it is not one single institution but a group of libraries that have to negotiate the important issues and live with the decisions made by the group. The composition and dynamics of the network of players has a direct effect on the final outcome and may differ from one cultural milieu to another based on the social context of the players, the cultural practices, the visions and approaches to cooperation, attitudes, and so on. Consensus is usually easier to reach in small groups. As the group gets larger, the risk of tension, disagreement, or overt conflict increases between various players, since each of them may have their own stakes and agendas. In other words, cooperation is at the heart of the development of a national union catalog. Cooperation principles, because they cannot easily be standardized, learned, or purchased as part of the integrated library system, tend to reflect the composition and group dynamics in a particular milieu and may account for the variance in outcomes. Cooperation, although defined succinctly by the Oxford English Dictionary (2d ed.) as “the action of cooperating, i.e., of working together towards the same end, purpose, or effect,” is a complex phenomenon. It means different things to different people and may evolve over time depending on what various actors contribute to the effort (and what they get out of their alliance with others). Developing a NUC, therefore, provides an opportunity for a group of libraries that are in an interdependent situation to organize and govern themselves and to obtain joint benefits, rather than pursuing selfish or individualistic objectives. The data drawn from respondents’ reflections of their experiences establishing a union catalog show a number of themes that appeared as recurrent threads across the seven countries. These themes illustrated the tensions that arise from negotiating the terms of a partnership with other actors and working toward a collective goal. I have grouped these themes under four headings, which I refer to as the four “dimensions” of cooperation. These are (1) the individual versus collective goals, (2) the centralization‐decentralization tensions, (3) the product versus process orientation, and (4) the global versus local considerations [1, 5]. Each will be described briefly, and discussion will be provided with regard to how these dimensions can help us explain variance of outcomes in the countries studied. Individual versus Collective Goals The trade‐off between individual and collective goals is a major challenge when undertaking collaborative projects [9–12]. Self‐interest or self‐reliance is the leading principle of individualism, that is, the interest of the individual has higher priority than the interest of the group, or the “common good.” In contrast, collectivism calls for joint approaches and strategies for solving problems. The incentives for individuals to abandon their selfish behaviors and opt for a joint approach may be many and varied, such as fiscal constraints, voluntary membership, or even coercion from an external power. We find a mixture of these incentives in the study of the establishment of the NUC projects. In South Africa, for instance, a computerized union catalog was started in the early 1980s by an informal group of a dozen libraries. Despite the voluntary nature of the attempt, the use of the national union catalog was limited [13]. In 1997, the possibility of getting funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation (and other funding sources) led to a resurgence of interest in SACat, which underwent some major revamping and was integrated into a strategy for the overall information infrastructure of the country [13–16]. In the other six countries, findings show that developing union catalogs was often not the primary impetus for cooperation among libraries. When asked about the incentives that led libraries to seek alliances with other libraries, respondents did not hesitate to admit that money was the biggest drive at the time, along with the possibility of getting technology and training from foreign foundations that started to manifest interest in higher education institutions and their libraries. As a Hungarian respondent mentioned, “Funding now is a main reason for library cooperation. Any other reason is idealistic.” These statements were echoed in other CEE countries and in the Baltic region. The funding provided by the foreign foundations (Soros Open Society Institute and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, to name two) allowed libraries to automate their internal and external processes, to modernize the infrastructure of libraries, to train library staff, and allowed librarians to travel abroad and visit major libraries. Soon, however, philanthropic foundations—followed by state agencies—started to adopt a systemic rather than individual approach to funding libraries, that is, encouraging cooperation at the national level. This contributed significantly to the shift from individualistic trends toward a collective approach that required joint problem solving and learning to make compromises and possibly even sacrifices. Respondents often described the early stages of the development of a NUC as being very difficult. Cooperation was perceived not as a spontaneous undertaking but rather as being “forced” or “strongly encouraged” by various funding sources. This obviously has repercussions on the process and the outcome. Respondents referred to group dynamics or decision‐making processes as being either “democratic” or “authoritarian,” depending on whether they reflected the decision of the majority or of certain groups only. In this sense, the situation of libraries resembled a “Prisoner’s Dilemma” in that libraries were encouraged to cooperate while legacies of individual prestige and lack of transparency had pitted libraries against one another and forced them to focus on their own interests and their users’ needs. One of the recurring comments by respondents with regard to the difficulties of reconciling individual and collective objectives had to do with the different visions, expectations, and working styles within each institution. This translated into deep suspicions of other libraries and their presumed motives for acting in particular ways: working groups were often said to be controlled by the respective library directors; university rectors were said to influence their libraries to adopt a specific position; other members’ decisions were often said to be tainted by political motives. For instance, in Poland the (then) Center for Authority Files and Formats had oversight over the work of catalogers from the various libraries through its editing and controlling functions. This situation was deemed unacceptable by many catalogers and some library heads who resisted this concentration of power in the hands of the Center. An understanding of the social context and cultural practices of libraries in the countries studied can shed light on the attitudes toward cooperation. Respondents reported that under the previous regimes there were few incentives to cooperate (“Cooperation was poor and only on paper”; a Hungarian respondent). Among the reasons advanced were these: the telecommunication and data network infrastructure were either inadequate or nonexistent; the institutional arrangement of libraries promoted competitive attitudes; the focus was on preservation and collection building rather than on provision of service to users; the prevailing mentalities of the time and the limited funding [5]. After the sociopolitical changes that started in the early 1990s (i.e., the shift from a socialist regime in CEE and the Baltic region to a free market economy and away from the apartheid system in South Africa), individualistic attitudes tended to prevail perhaps as a reaction against decades of centralization and isolation. As a Czech respondent described the situation: “Now we are free. We can do what we want.” A Polish respondent commented: “We are allergic to organization. We were too well‐organized for many years.” The results have been the development of library consortia based on geographical proximity (e.g., South Africa’s preference for regional consortia rather than a national approach) or based on the purchase of a common library system (e.g., the Aleph system among CASLIN‐participating libraries, VTLS or Horizon‐based consortia in Poland, Dynix or Corvina consortia in Hungary, etc.) or based on types of libraries (e.g., academic libraries, public libraries, etc.). The existence of different subgroups, preferences for different library systems, and the multiple affiliations and networks that people belong to has worked, at times, against national cooperation. Examples include the decision in Slovakia and Estonia to create two separate union databases located in different cities/institutions or the endless discussions in Poland over the usefulness of authority files. These divisions and boundaries create an “us versus them” mentality that was recurrent throughout the data and across countries. Ultimately, this situation hurts the overall progress toward the collective goal. This fragmentation poses a threat to the development of national union catalogs, particularly when such a project is imposed from the top either by a ministry or a grant donor. The ways in which the individual versus collective dimension played out in the countries studied depended on the social context prevailing at the time. In the case of the Czech and Slovak Library Information Network (CASLIN), once the goals for which the group of libraries came together were achieved, participants did not see a need to formalize the agreement further or collaborate on other projects [17–18]. In other cases, reconciling individual and collective goals was a long and arduous process filled with personal conflicts, conflicts of interest, disagreements about goals and visions, and lack of any clearly established organizational structure. In many instances, the result has been total inertia and the feeling that “much time was wasted in endless discussions,” as was the case for MOKKA in Hungary, or in the situation in Latvia. When no compromise seemed attainable, threats of sanctions—usually in the form of withdrawal of financial support—became the only incentive for libraries to adopt a cohesive stance. In Poland, for instance, libraries that were faced with such an ultimatum from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation were able to resume their dialogue, negotiate a middle ground, and adopt a unified front [3]. As local knowledge accumulated and the fruits of cooperation started to appear, the awareness of the benefits of a joint approach became more evident. This is best illustrated by this comment from an Estonian respondent: “Before, we used to ask when is it that we will be done with cooperation. Now we understand that it will never really end.” Centralization‐Decentralization Tensions The bulk of the data collected in the seven countries revolved around the tensions that usually arose during negotiations over the terms of the partnership and the setting of boundaries between institutions. At the heart of these tensions is the adequate distribution of role, the proper sharing of responsibility (what to centralize vs. decentralize), and the sharing of power. Indeed, decentralization implies fractionalization of control or power among a dispersed group, which requires some amount of delegation of authority and mutual trust [19–20]. The tension between centralization and decentralization ran throughout the data and emerged with regard to the model of a NUC but also with regard to the institutional arrangement and governance of libraries (e.g., power dynamics, group size, boundaries, etc.). Libraries in the countries studied traditionally depended on different ministries and were governed under a mixture of centralization and decentralization [3, 17, 21–23]. The fragmentation of libraries did not contribute to interlibrary cooperation; exchange of data was limited and there were few attempts to adopt common standards (much less international standards), as these countries were under embargo from the international community during the socialist and apartheid regimes. The flow of information and people was also rather restricted. Libraries’ legacy of top‐down intervention in the former socialist countries made it a particularly tough challenge to undertake meaningful changes in their working habits and to position themselves as major players in the development of national information policies. Because they are shared by multiple communities and are the object of constant negotiation, national union catalogs can be viewed as platforms that enable the decentralization of responsibilities and duties of libraries. As such, they contribute to redraw the library picture of the country. In Poland, for instance, three major university libraries (in Krakow, Warsaw, and Gdansk) provided a dynamic base for developments in networking, system development, authority control, and staff training. The Polish national union catalog, NUKAT, was established as a joint effort between the National Library and two other library consortia (the VTLS system‐based libraries and the Horizon system‐based libraries). A unique feature of South Africa is the close cooperation between South African libraries (grouped into five regional consortia: Gaelic, Calico, Frelico, Esal, and Seals) and the service provider, Sabinet Online. The national union catalog is run by Sabinet Online, which also manages the interlibrary lending system service for the entire country and several other services for libraries. Sabinet Online is a commercial spin‐off of Sabinet, the South African Bibliographic Network, which is a nonprofit association that was founded in 1983 by forty‐six library and information centers. The aims of Sabinet were to develop a library network in South Africa and to initiate a union catalog for the country [13, 16]. In turn, Sabinet Online has become a major player in the library environment in South Africa and collaborates closely with the various regional consortia; there seems to be a great deal of mutual trust between them. Respondents from the seven countries seem to be increasingly aware that cooperation means losing independence and that some amount of centralization may lead to better cooperation. In this sense, a mixture of centralization and decentralization was viewed as necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the cooperative goals. Traditionally, in CEE and the Baltic region, the National Library was legally entitled to coordinate the libraries in the country (one respondent referred to the national library as the “mother of all libraries”). The paradox that emerges from the data is that respondents would like a central coordinating body, but they resist the idea of the National Library performing this role on the ground that their national library is too rigid and slow in implementing automation or in paving the way for standardization. Major academic and research libraries seem to be particularly eager to play a more active role in library and information policies in their country. The countries studied experimented with various management models. In Estonia and Latvia, the union catalog falls under the purview of a consortium of libraries (ELNET in Estonia and LINC in Latvia), which consists of a high‐level committee (board of regents in Latvia; board and general assembly in Estonia), an executive or steering committee that includes representatives of the library members, and various working groups. The other countries all have formal structures to manage the NUC but lack any formal and/or legal agreements between libraries. In Poland, the founding members decided that the grant was to be managed by the University Library in Warsaw (the Polish acronym for which is BUW). A NUKAT Center was established at BUW with the responsibility of maintaining the union catalog. despite the absence of any legally binding contract, a governing board (coordinating group) was set up, along with several task forces. The situation is similar in the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic, where no formal association or consortium exists but where expert councils, R&D teams, and working groups were nonetheless formed. In Hungary, MOKKA is the acronym for both the union catalog and the association of the original fifteen founding members who initiated the union catalog efforts. Members agreed that the National Széchényi Library would be in charge of developing and maintaining the system (with funding and support from the Ministry of National Cultural Heritage). The MOKKA Association still exists as a representative of the interests of the member libraries and is involved in all decisions concerning the future development of the union catalog. Finally, in South Africa, the union catalog is owned by the nonprofit association, Sabinet, which subcontracts Sabinet Online to maintain the union catalog. A board, comprised of all member libraries, and a standards committee make all the decisions regarding the development of the union catalog. With the exception of South Africa, where the budget for running the NUC comes from members’ subscription fees, the financial arrangements in the six other countries are usually a mixture of government funds and grants from foreign sources. This top‐down approach may be problematic when government interference becomes an obstacle to the common goal, such as was the case in the early stages of CASLIN and in the Latvian situation, where two conflicting projects were championed by different parties [3]. The findings suggest the usefulness of a structure that combines the advantages of the decentralized and centralized solutions. A hierarchical structure—especially when centrally administered—seems to be more stable than the decentralized structure and often secures more cooperation than the centralized structure. Most respondents, across countries, seem to be responsive to a good balance of centralization and decentralization. Product versus Process Orientation As with any kind of partnership, there is a need for the collaborating parties to see a concrete result or a pragmatic outcome that can justify (e.g., to funding sources, users, staff members) the sacrifices made and, in some cases, the loss of independence of each individual institution. An example of pragmatic outcome is the adoption of international standards. This was the first and major achievement in most of the countries studied: within CASLIN, for instance, working groups investigated and made recommendations for adopting TCP/IP, Z39.50, UNIMARC, AACR2, ISO character sets, minimum level of cataloging, and so on. Special expert working groups were established to inquire about different aspects of the implementation of the system. An intensive program of staff training and translation of manuals, guides, and thesauri was rigorously pursued in order to undertake the switch efficiently in a period of one year. Such initiatives provided concrete measures of the steps undertaken and brought libraries closer to the collective goal. The focus on the product, or end result, is also evident in the discussions that took place between institutions, especially with regard to the architecture and functionalities of the national union catalog: Should libraries keep their local system and do the cataloging locally or opt for a centralized union catalog that required them to purchase a new system, learn how to use it, and adopt new rules and standards? Beyond the focus on the end result, or the pragmatic outcome, attention must be given to the “process” or the coming together of the various parties that form the group. The links and relationships between the members can help determine what strategies (collaborative or competitive) prevailed within the group. The decisions made for the union catalogs reflect the nature of the relationship between the libraries involved. In this regard, the “political” aspects are often much harder to solve than the technical aspects. The situation of Slovakia and Estonia illustrates this point. In Slovakia, the monographs and the periodicals are maintained in two separate catalogs and by two different institutions: the Slovak National Library is in charge of the Slovak Union Catalog for Monographs, whereas the Periodicals Union Database is maintained by the University Library in Bratislava. The data show that there has been a great deal of tension and rivalry between the two institutions (the two most important libraries in the country), especially when it comes to the national library status and functions. The Slovak National Library is located in Martin, a small city in the heart of the Tatras mountains, an eight‐hour train ride from the capital, Bratislava. Martin has been, and remains, a stronghold of Slovak identity and culture. Despite the library community’s support for the Slovak National Library in Martin, there have been various attempts to move the functions of the national library to the capital. In 2000, a new library law clarified the tensions and reaffirmed the status of the Slovak National Library as the national library, although some of its functions were to be shared with the University Library in Bratislava (such as the maintenance of the union catalog for periodicals). The Estonian situation also involves two separate databases for the NUC. The National Library in the capital city, Tallinn, maintains one. The Tartu University Library, located in the city of Tartu, maintains the other. Each of the databases collects the holdings of the participating libraries within that city. There are links from one database to the other, but the searches have to be done separately, as data cannot be retrieved from both catalogs in one search. In a sense, one can speak of two union catalogs, one for Tartu libraries and one for Tallinn libraries. The decision to have two separate databases was justified in technical terms (the state of the networking infrastructure was not deemed adequate, and the connections were unreliable) as well as for pragmatic reasons (circulation updates and the cost of merging the two databases). Beyond these practical reasons, however, lie deeper motivations that surfaced frequently in respondents’ accounts: Tallinn and Tartu are two traditionally distinct poles in Estonia, each with its own culture and identity. Tartu holds an important place in Estonia’s history and is a center of academic excellence with a large student population. Tallinn is a younger and blooming metropolis, a major business center, as well as the seat of government. The decision to keep separate the two databases was viewed as a means to keep this balance and “distinctiveness” between the two poles/cities/regions. Taking into account this geopolitical reality (a respondent talked about “working around” this situation), the Estonian experience in organizing libraries into a nationwide consortium (ELNET) has been exemplary: libraries have been able to cooperate and implement the union catalog ESTER and undertake other cooperative initiatives in a very efficient and reasonable manner. This has not always been the case elsewhere. In many instances, there were reports about the lengthy discussions that dragged on with regard to the most suitable model for the union catalog. Most libraries started from a base of little knowledge about automation and international standards and had limited compatible data. Technically speaking, a virtual union catalog is difficult to justify in the countries studied because of the differences in the level of automation of various libraries, the inadequate networking infrastructure, the institutional arrangements of libraries, and the coexistence of different standards. In this sense, the real union catalog (with a centrally stored database) is best suited for the libraries’ needs and circumstances—it allows them to search against the collections of the consortia members and provides a reliable tool for users to locate the information they need [6, 8]. It is not surprising, therefore, that the choice of a real union catalog (vs. a virtual catalog model) was chosen as the model in the seven countries. Yet, lengthy discussions took place about the appropriate model of a NUC. The diverging perspectives (on the objectives as well as on the means to achieve them) significantly halted any “real progress” of the common project, to use the words of a Hungarian respondent. The Polish NUKAT provides another example of how the disagreements in vision can jeopardize the cooperative endeavor. The major point of contention among the NUKAT member libraries seemed to revolve around the usefulness of authority records. Visions differed, as some libraries strongly resisted the idea of authority control, whereas others viewed it as a condition sine qua non of the establishment of NUKAT. The two camps maintained their respective positions for an extended period of time, each claiming the validity of its arguments. Opponents to authority files pointed out that they did not question the usefulness of authority files per se but did not deem them necessary in the context of Polish librarianship. They mentioned the attitude of the proponents of authority records as being “bully‐like” and inflexible in their attempt to impose their views without any evidence of a need for them. A respondent noted, “Nobody ever did a user needs survey, or checked in the literature how the searches are done by most of the library users in academic libraries—the students—and if authority control really is that important.” This example illustrates the danger of becoming fixed early on in a particular mindset and not listening to those who have differing views. In the case of Poland, the two competing views were “authority files are a must” versus “we do not need authority files.” As a consequence, the overall purpose of NUKAT was questioned repeatedly: Was NUKAT a truly shared catalog of the holdings of the major academic libraries in Poland geared toward helping users to search for resources and locate the items? Or, was NUKAT primarily a source of “perfect” authority records for catalogers? These questions go beyond any differences in implementation of the union catalog and raise more serious differences in vision and overall philosophy. When the disagreement is due to differing perceptions, with no agreement on the purpose of the coming together of the various parties (i.e., what do we want to achieve?), it becomes more difficult to justify or restore cooperation. Without maintenance, the cooperative endeavor falls into pieces and becomes a ruin. Global versus Local Considerations The countries studied are all considered “societies in transition,” since the crumbling of the apartheid regime in South Africa in 1993 and the dissolution of the socialist regime in the other six countries, which started in 1989. The challenge for the libraries in these countries seemed to lie in reconciling the particular national tradition (i.e., preservation of identity, culture, and language) with an interest in “everything Western.” As an example, Western integrated library systems were often preferred over local systems developed in the country. This was often not clearly stated. Rather, the choice of foreign systems was justified in terms of their compatibility with international standards despite certain inconsistencies with regard to the current library practices. As a Hungarian respondent mentioned, “Each system transferred to non‐English speaking countries [is] never ready to be implemented to other language environments.” The issue of language also came up with regard to the display of Cyrillic characters. In Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic region, a large portion of the library materials is in Russian, as a significant segment of the population had Russian as its first language. Moreover, the large amount of materials printed in Russian accounts for the predominance of Russian materials in the national bibliography of these countries. The problem associated with displaying Cyrillic characters was often mentioned by respondents, along with the problems of sorting the search results in keyword indexes (e.g., the search results did not display in correct alphabetical order). Some countries, like Estonia, made use of both of the Latin (Estonian) and Russian alphabets. In the countries studied, most libraries started from a base of little knowledge about library standards, and there seemed to be a great deal of confusion about which standards were most appropriate for the libraries’ needs. These decisions all engendered heated debates, as the following excerpts show: Standards after 1989 were confused. Hard discussions were going on but nobody knew any systems other than the traditional ones. (Hungarian respondent) Automation processes started in the 1990s: a commission headed by the National Library and other experts agreed on standards for automation, library systems, etc. We looked around to see what was used but there was a need for an interpretation in Czech. UNIMARC was considered a good bridge between different data. Maybe USMARC was better off. Few debates went on because few people had experience with MARC. (Czech respondent) Bibliographic description in Poland was standard ISBD then USMARC was chosen supposedly because support for it was better by [X] and other computer science folks with creative input from librarians, although there was a bit of opposition. Opposition was because the choice was made mainly by CS folks, and because of the “dictatorial” attitude of [X] which was like “Love it or leave it.” (Polish respondent) More than a purely technical issue, the choice of systems and standards also has a political dimension: Which cataloging and classification schemes should we use? What should be the minimal level of cataloging? Who is to make the decision about what should be mandatory or not? Adherence to international standards was among the priorities of CASLIN, the Czech and Slovak Library Information Network, and one of its major achievements. Poland also recognized early on the need for international standards. The Polish subject headings system, KABA, is compatible with the Library of Congress (LC) subject headings and the French RAMEAU. With the exception of Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Poland, many NUCs do not prescribe the use of specific schemes for the arrangement and description of data. Despite efforts toward introducing a uniform set of standards (UDC, LCSH, etc.), member libraries often prefer using uncontrolled index terms or their own search terms. In South Africa, although Library of Congress subject headings are used extensively, they were not uniformly applied: titles with a specific South African content or that were not covered in sufficient detail in LCSH were localized according to such tools as the “Thesaurus of South Africa sociopolitical and economic items from an Apartheid perspective” [24]. In Estonia, the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) was used as a classification scheme, with subject headings based on the Estonian Universal Thesaurus (itself based in part on the Finnish Thesaurus). In Hungary, no comprehensive Hungarian vocabulary was developed. Instead, various data descriptions emerged within institutions. UDC has been the preferred subject access tool for decades by most libraries. At the time of the study, the MOKKA database included both UDC strings and various data descriptions used by the member libraries, all of which could be used for information retrieval. As the economy becomes increasingly interconnected via a global information infrastructure, more knowledge is needed about political and cultural differences in the use of information, its institutions, and its technologies. This applies also to systems of knowledge organization and representation. As Dudbridge ([25], cited in [26, p. 511]) states, classification systems are “intellectual, and fundamentally also political, constructs: they represent, and impose, a view of the world at a certain time and in a certain environment.” Classification schemes are social constructs that carry with them a set of values and biases [26–30]. The socially constructed nature of classification has been discussed by Bowker and Star [27, p. 276], who referred to classification as “necessarily imperialistic” in that it represents a particular way of viewing the world. In her analysis of various systems for data arrangement and description, such as LCSH and DDC, Olson [31] shed light on the power inherent in “naming” and the close relationships between the logical structure of classification systems and the broader sociocultural context in which these develop. Her analysis sheds light on the potential of such tools for becoming devices of “cultural authority” [31, p. 55] or “cultural reinforcement” [31, p. 58]. Beghtol [26, p. 518] uses the concept of “cultural hospitality” to make a case for an ethical warrant for knowledge representation and organization systems in a globalized world. Such a concept recognizes the potentially imperialistic nature of these systems and calls for an assessment of their ethical underpinnings. There was evidence in the data of the political nature of standards. For instance, a few respondents criticized the relevance of USMARC to Hungarian libraries and preferred instead to use the Hungarian version of MARC, known as HUNMARC. One respondent reported the problems associated with USMARC as follows: Originally, MARC was an exchange format (like UNIMARC), not a cataloging format. Because of the heavy influence of the U.S. libraries that use USMARC, it is considered as an international standard, but it should not be taken as an international standard: USMARC is old and has all the old‐fashioned things in it. It is awful and a disadvantage for British and for Hungarian libraries because 1) some fields are not sub‐fielded enough and cannot be indexed or searched; 2) the name authority and bibliography: name of persons are not handled properly for Hungarian, where the last name comes first. This makes USMARC not really suitable for Hungarian and other libraries. The seven countries studied were all undergoing sociopolitical changes, and their move toward implementing standards of all sorts seemed to be a part of a broader discourse on transition and change, as exemplified by excerpts below: They [the participating libraries] selected the same formats, USMARC, after a big discussion and political issues as to whether to go with European or U.S. systems and standards. (Polish respondent) Polish standards were very bad, especially bibliographic description. The first year, they had to teach themselves standards. The main discussions were about which standards. Finally, they decided to go with U.S. standards, although they were a European country, because they were not thinking that they would integrate the EU [European Union]. They were not in the position economically. (Polish respondent) These two excerpts illustrate the political nature of standard setting. The choices of standards are not always related to technical solutions or best practices, but often to strategic games aimed at advancing one’s agenda. Discussions by respondents about library technologies and networking were often intertwined with references to the strategic importance of information for democracy and the role of technology in a context of globalization. In particular, the penetration of the Internet was often associated with greater information flow and transparency. Language reminiscent of the European Union Program on the Information Society was often adopted and adapted (e.g., “information have” and “have‐nots,” “telematics,” “intelligent country,” “intelligent cities,” “virtual libraries,” etc.). Similarly, respondents emphasized repeatedly the importance of communication, transparency, greater openness, and collaboration as a means to develop their nation’s information infrastructure along with library and information policies [2]. It is not clear yet how much these terms are fully promoted nationally and “localized” (vs. used rhetorically). Summary Establishing national union catalogs is a complex process that has to take into account various elements—many of them dealing with “human” factors. Table 5 is an attempt to make sense of this complexity by framing the NUC in terms of the four dimensions of cooperation and how they relate to the technical, philosophical, and organizational aspects discussed earlier. Table 5 is not organized by country (or around NUC projects) primarily because the issues raised by respondents with regard to the establishment of a national union catalog are strikingly similar across countries. These include the adoption and use of information technologies (library systems, standards, and protocols), the governance and funding, the potential and obstacles of cooperation and resource sharing, the “human factors” (including attitudes), and the importance of users and provision of services. Table 5 Influence of the Four Dimensions of Cooperation on the Establishment of a NUC Technical Aspects Philosophical Aspects Organizational Aspects Individual versus collective Existing infrastructure, coexistence of library systems, costs of switching standards, incentives Social context and cultural practices, self‐interest versus self‐reliance, benefits of cooperation, attitudes Incentives to cooperate versus to compete; institutional arrangement; personal frictions Centralization versus decentralization Decision‐making about library system, agreement on standards and protocols Group size and boundaries, sharing of responsibilities, shared vision Governance and rules, sanctioning and monitoring, national information policy Product versus process Tools with which to cooperate, importance of the pragmatic outcome, impact of the system/technology on choices, relationship with vendors Dynamics: who is included (or not) in the debates? compromises and consensus, functional versus symbolic role of communication, local knowledge Forum for discussion, facilitators, leadership, formalization of agreement, financial sustainability Global versus local Local system versus foreign system, political nature of standards Acting locally, thinking globally; culture, language and identity issues; integrating the West, EU, GII, and so forth Discourse versus practice, sustainability, empowerment, training It would not be correct to say that one country fared better than another. Rather, the differences across projects and across countries tell us much about the variables involved in collaborative projects, including those variables that are not given serious consideration initially (e.g., cultural practices, approach to cooperation, product vs. process orientation, etc.). These differences also help us identify patterns of practice. Poland’s NUKAT and Estonia’s ESTER have both shown interesting trends and results, although the process was very different in each case. In Poland, as was mentioned, three distinct library consortia were formed around three integrated library systems (VTLS, Innopac, Horizon). Negotiations around the NUC were undertaken until a consensus was reached. Discussions were particularly heated with regard to the relevance of authority files and the selection of a common system. Leadership—although contested at times—and the widespread culture of grassroots initiatives and local organization from Poles helped to pull together the different threads. Threats of sanctions from the funding source were also instrumental in encouraging the consortia to redefine its collective goals and speak with one voice. In Estonia, a much smaller country, the decision early on was to select one common system for the whole country. The ties with Nordic countries, and especially Finland, may have contributed to the spirit of community building and consensus among participating libraries. A highly participatory process and very effective leadership made it possible to focus on the collective goal as the priority, despite the differences between Tallinn and Tartu, both of which seem to have a strong sense of regional identity. Other NUC projects had their share of successes and difficulties, much like NUKAT and ESTER, but to a different extent. The progress of Hungary’s MOKKA was halted as a result of the lack of a shared goal and of a common voice. It was a victim of personal frictions, power plays, and differing visions. The Latvian libraries’ union catalog is in a working state, but the path toward establishing the LINC consortium was rocky and filled with personal frictions, obstacles, conflicts, unwillingness to make sacrifices, and a lack of leadership. In South Africa, there was a trend toward working within regional consortia rather than at a national level. The focus of libraries on their respective regional consortia, along with the intermediary role played by the service provider, Sabinet Online, resulted in a lack of genuine interest and involvement by libraries in SACat. As a respondent mentioned, “I don’t know why we never talk about SACat and how it all fits into the national library picture. If anything were to happen to Sabinet, who would take over SACat?” Another interesting example is CASLIN—despite the huge advances it made possible for libraries in the Czech and Slovak republics, it was not able to materialize into a body that would allow cooperation to continue. Respondents interviewed experienced difficulty extrapolating about it and reaching any common understanding of this entity that is CASLIN. The ongoing and probably most successful manifestation of CASLIN is the CASLIN seminar series, the aim of which is to bring together the CASLIN‐participating libraries and provide them with a space to exchange information and share experiences. While CASLIN remains a framework for library automation and developments in these two countries, the union catalogs in Czech Republic and Slovakia were progressively detached from CASLIN and took lives of their own. The National Union Catalog as a Boundary Object In their landmark study of a zoological museum, Star and Griesemer [32] coined the term “boundary object” to designate an artifact that links diverse interests and relates various groups. They define boundary objects as “both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites. They are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly structured in individual site‐use. Like a blackboard, a boundary object ‘sits in the middle’ of a group of actors with divergent viewpoints” ([31], p. 46). A national union catalog can be viewed as a boundary object in that it is shared by multiple communities and yet is the object of constant negotiation. The NUC “sits in the middle” of a group of libraries—it is at once a platform that provides incentives for libraries to work toward a common goal (and consequently enables the sharing of responsibilities and the decentralization of power), while epitomizing the tensions and divergences in opinions. In the countries studied, the data show that not only did respondents hold different visions of what a national union catalog should be (distributed vs. centralized), but they also experienced difficulty communicating their position to one another and reaching an understanding. One Polish respondent referred to the idea of “speaking different dialects” to describe the simultaneous and parallel discourses held about the NUC in his country. The NUC as a boundary object helps us understand the plurality of discourses held by the various libraries: some favored a “policy‐making” discourse that focused on the regulatory framework, division of responsibilities, fee structure, compatibility, intellectual property issues, and so forth. Others adopted a “technological” discourse that emphasizes systems design, interoperability and standards, functionalities, or character sets. Another type of discourse, more social in nature, put the focus on users, access, equity issues, the place of library institutions, and the overall information culture in these societies. Similarly, when asked to reflect on the challenges encountered during the development of their NUC, respondents in all countries expressed these in different ways. Some framed the difficulties in terms of an implementation problem; others characterized it as a design or a political problem. Others yet related to the construction of a NUC at an individual level, that is, taking the conflicts and tensions very personally. What becomes clear is that because a national union catalog crosses so many boundaries (e.g., different players, worldviews, interests, communities, etc.), it is very difficult to “fix” its form (the nature of the agreement between libraries). Many respondents expressed their frustration with regard to the “invisibility” of MOKKA, CASLIN, or NUKAT. A Czech respondent stated, “CASLIN still does not exist: there is no association, no body.” The desire of participants to “fix” the nature of the cooperative effort in a certain manner was a recurring theme, particularly in Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, and to a certain extent, South Africa. In these countries, the players seem to be at the critical stage of trying to redraw the social map of libraries in their country. Technological artifacts, such as NUCs, can stabilize or destabilize relationships between institutions, in particular, the delicate balance between centralization and decentralization that is at the heart of the interaction of technology and institutions [33]. Indeed, centralized power facilitates the establishment of compatible solutions (e.g., standards and decision making). In turn, proper compatibility paves the way for power to be decentralized and shared among participants. A national union catalog attempt can fail with an overly centralized concentration of power (e.g., in the hands of a national library or a dominant library consortium), but the success of a union catalog also can be jeopardized by an insufficient consensus around its establishment (especially in countries like Poland where a strong culture of self‐reliance at the local level resulted in the creation of many loud voices with strong interests, which made it hard to reach a consensus). Scholars of Science and Technology Studies (STS) refer to the concept of “translation” [34–35] to explain the negotiations that take place over a technological artifact in an attempt to reconcile the tensions that arise. An example that was previously mentioned was the choice of (predominantly) Western library schemes and standards for the arrangement and description of data. Another example of “mediating” an artifact that appeared prominently throughout respondents’ accounts, especially in the four Eastern European countries in the 1999 data, is the Z39.50 communication protocol. The Z39.50 client‐server architecture allows the client to have access to any Z39.50 server and to create an interface between the two systems. Some respondents presented Z39.50 as the magic solution to all interoperability problems between systems—Z39.50 was viewed as a means to solve communication problems between the different systems (really, a way out of the need for selecting one common system). Other respondents, however, were careful to mention that no such protocols could replace the need to devise more rigorous and explicit collaborative agreements. In this sense, Z39.50 played a pivotal role in the development and negotiation of the relationships between participating institutions in the cooperative endeavor and was repeatedly used to try to reconcile individual goals with collective goals. The lengthy discussions concerning Z39.50 in 1999 (vs. in the 2002 data) may be explained by the general hype (and often a lack of understanding) about the potential of Z39.50 protocols. The assumption that Z39.50 would provide an interface between different systems may have been attractive to those unwilling to opt for one common system, implement common standards, and set objectives that did not have immediate benefits for their institution. The pretense of cooperation (e.g., saving face or getting “a piece of the pie”) would remain but without any obligations or interference with the individual library’s goals. Not surprisingly, many respondents advocated a wait‐and‐see attitude regarding the NUC development until further improvements of the Z39.50 protocol could be realized, which can be read as an attempt at maintaining the status quo. This example illustrates once again how the shaping of a national union catalog is dependent on a heterogeneous network of social and technical elements (see table 5). The NUCs in the countries studied are at different stages, but one thing is clear, as Orlikowski [36] relates in her example of the introduction of Lotus Notes in one corporation—the software has to fit with the culture. The model opted for a NUC has to fit with the culture. The challenge seems to lie in reconciling the tension between individual and collective rationality. Lessons Learned There are lessons for both libraries and funding agencies that one can learn from these respondents’ reflections about their experiences with establishing national union catalogs. Writing about his extensive experience with library developments in many of the countries surveyed in this article, Richard Quandt [3, pp. 284–85], senior advisor to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, cites as “measures of success” (although one can wonder what is meant by “success”) the following factors: resourcefulness; patience; flexibility; an unfailing spirit of cooperation, along with a sensible, relaxed, and nonhierarchical management style; and finally, the realization of advantages of consortial approaches. Quandt also mentions prominently the role of the leader (project manager) along with the support from state agencies, higher education institutions, and friends in high places. By contrast, his indicators of failure include culture (values, beliefs, and attitudes), failures in governance (government intervention or power struggles), and inappropriate rent seeking. The data from the interviews corroborate Quandt’s personal impressions. The matrix in table 5 reflects many of the factors identified by Quandt and others [17, 37]. What seems to be most needed for libraries and other players involved in the library and information field is a framework for understanding the complexity of cooperative projects—whether it be developing a national union catalog or any other cooperative endeavor. Perhaps the most important lesson to be learned from this study is the complex nature of cooperation and its different meaning for different people. The four dimensions of cooperation can be used as a starting point for educating all those involved (project managers, library staff, university rectors, funding agencies) as to the principles underlying cooperation: What does it mean to “cooperate” with others? What is involved? How is it achieved? How is it being done elsewhere? The second and related lesson is to communicate, communicate, and communicate some more. Communication is the essence of cooperation and consensus building. Identifying and keeping open the channels of communication is instrumental to the successful cooperative endeavor, and it needs to occur at various levels: between project managers and the library staff, between participating libraries, between libraries and vendors, between libraries and their parent institution, between working groups and the board, and so forth. Structures should be put in place that allow the transfer of knowledge and the flow of information. The other important lesson learned relates to the accumulation of local knowledge. Accumulation of knowledge takes place within the local institution (e.g., implementing a library integrated system, undertaking retrospective conversion, etc.). The lessons learned from the local context increasingly contribute to shared experiences and understanding among various groups, hence, the importance of professional development sessions (e.g., the CASLIN seminars), of organizing and attending conferences, becoming active in professional associations, and so on. The accumulation of local knowledge enables (and shapes) further dialogue, common strategies, and may lead to new cooperative projects. Its importance must not be minimized. The learning process that results from the accumulation of local knowledge is essential, not only to the libraries themselves but also to interorganizational relationships and overall institutional and capacity building. In the long term, there are benefits for both the library and information sector and society as a whole. It is, therefore, essential for philanthropic foundations, state agencies, and other funding agencies to think beyond technology transfer and instead provide the tools that will allow the libraries in the country to build or rebuild their social capital. This may include communication and trust‐building workshops, seminars on cooperation and resource sharing, as well as a balanced approach that offers guidance while leaving room for people to conduct experiments and learn on their own. The role of granting agencies, therefore, is to help libraries and other institutions articulate clear, reasonable, and achievable goals, but without imposing more conditions than necessary. By providing enough flexibility, the stress is put on the learning process and the accumulation of local knowledge, which ultimately matters more than the final outcome or “thing.”