ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS: PROMISE AND PERFORMANCE JOSEPH J. THOMAS INTRODUCTION The printed word remains the back- bone of the record of man in all of his activities whether they be in the social, industrial, political, scientific, eco- nomic, or artistic worlds. "Hard copy" of the written word still involves paper in spite of the many technological pro- cesses of recording that utilize photo- graphic, magnetic, electronic and/or other new techniques. Invariably we come back to the "image on paper" as the real workhorse in our daily work of living and doing. Hence it is perti- nent that we today talk about paper as one of mankind's primary raw mate- rials. That such recording should have permanence seems obvious, but only now are we really doing something ac- tively about its longevity. Paper in the educational field, as the vehicle for the transmission of in- formation, is but one of its many uses, because we have learned to apply paper to all facets of life. Today we have many different kinds of paper to do many different kinds of jobs. World War II was a major stimulus to our research and development in the paper industry to make paper perform jobs that hitherto had not been dreamed of. Paper was applied extensively in the war effort, in packaging, in industrial usages, and in many other jobs as other raw materials became scarce or non- existent. Today paper has come of age and is the tenth largest industry in the United States. This discussion, however, will be pri- marily concerned with "printing paper" and, therefore, we must define the properties of such paper in terms of its use for printing and publishing. Certainly we should not apply to print- ing paper the criteria and specifications that we would apply to industrial papers. In other words, the end use should truly be reflected in the proper- ties and specifications that we deline- ate. In the case of book manufacture, such paper is to receive accurately the image from the printing plate; it must handle well through the presses and the bindery; and finally it must per- form in the hands of the reader. Thus, manifold uses should be covered in the so-called specifications. Economically, it would be wasteful to build more into the paper than is needed for its opti- mum performance; on the other hand, adequate properties to embrace opti- mum manufacturing and usage must be covered. Paper's composition, its meth- od of manufacture, conversion to use, storage, and utilization should all be weighed in consideration of specifica- tions. For example, newsprint with its temporary, transient use certainly dif- fers in requirements from the perma- nent, archival uses of the historian. Likewise, the properties required in pa- pers for machine-shop manuals, army maps or navy charts differ from those needed for insurance rate-books or chemical handbooks whose usage will be rendered obsolete with time as tech- nological progress out-dates the infor- mation contained therein. Papers for electrophotographic printing or for magnetic recording must have a differ- ent definition from paper to be printed by gravure and used as a label on a bottle or tin can. 99
100 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Therefore, my remarks on paper will be confined to the end uses of printing, publishing, binding, and finally as a book in your hands in the library, where it should remain available and usable to posterity 100 or 200 years from now. HISTORICAL Examination of the literature shows that there has been a great deal of interest in the permanizing of man's records by studying the substrate paper. There seems to have been much talk but little action until W. J. Barrow really lit a fire on the subject in the 1950s and 1960s. Two papers with comprehensive bibliographies on paper durability are U.S. Government Print- ing Office Technical Bulletin no. 22, published in 1940 and entitled "Perma- nence and Durability of Paper, an An- notated Bibliography from 1885 A.D. to 1939 A.D." and "Paper Performance" by Philip Luner in TAPPI magazine (52, no. 5 [May 1969]: 801). For those who wish a comprehensive study on the subject I would recommend these two references for good histori- cal and technical background. Back in the good old days when life moved a little more leisurely and there were fewer economic and competitive pressures, rag papers made in a slow careful way seemed to be the answer to the longevity problem; but this was not wholly true, especially if sizing was obtained by the use of alum with rosin. However, as economic pressures de- manded more and more production at lower costs the change to wood fibers met the ever-increasing demand for paper. Mass production became the "paper way of life" and we lost some- thing. Alum became the papermaker's panacea, for it not only set rosin to give sizing a temporary resistance to water, but it also made the wet fibrous slurry on the Fourdrinier wire more free to drain water and thus increased production. Despite these advantages, however, the use of alum resulted in acid paper. ORIGIN OF ALKALINE PAPERS I would like to be able to say that we in our company had the perspicacity to see the evil of alum and to predict our alkaline future, but, as in many discoveries, the real stimulation was pressure to utilize a by-product that came from our soda process in isolating fibers from trees. Lime mud resulted from our recovery of soda-cooking liq- uors, when we treated the ash from the burning of our pulp-cooking liquor with slaked lime (fig. 1). This regenerated our soda chemicals to be used in cook- ing more wood, but the resulting use- less precipitate was calcium carbonate, which we could only pile up behind the mill. Its nice white color made it look tempting, and we hoped to find a use for this by-product since the bleached purified cellulosic fibers coming from that pulp mill made such excellent book paper. We had already established to our own satisfaction that cellulose fibers regardless of their source, whether it be rags or trees, if purified, were of a dur- able and permanent character and that we could make good and lasting paper from properly purified wood fibers. Credit for much of this thinking goes to the father of paper chemistry, Edwin Sutermeister, who had come to us as a new graduate from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1899. It was he who, in 1901, made the experiments with lime mud and set aside a series of papers that he examined periodically to see the effect of this by-product on the paper versus the usual paper mak- ing techniques extant. Specifically, he
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 101 set aside six "super" plain papers that had been manufactured between 1896 and 1901; five were clay filled and one had lime mud as filler. The fiber fur- nish varied from all rag, to mixtures of rag and sulphite wood pulp, to all wood fibers (mixtures of bleached sulphite and soda pulps). The sixth sample which had the lime mud was 75 percent sulphite and 25 percent soda wood fibers; it had a pH of 8.9, while the other five samples had pH values vary- ing from 3.6 to 4.3. When Edwin Suter- meister examined the samples in 1929 WOOD CHIPS NaOH O ADD Ca(OH)2 PRODUCES NaOH FOR DIGESTER REUSE AND CoCo3 ---BY PRODUCT IMODERN MILLS NOW RECOVER TTHIS CaCO3IN LIME KILNS TO IREUSE AS Ca(OH)2 WOOD PULP TO BE BLEACHED l l RECOVERY { FOR PAPERMAKING : _ ,* Na2C03 _ ~FUR NACE LIQUOR I ~~~~~~~PRODUCES L -_oWHICH WAS THE STEAM POWER SODIUM SALTS OF LIME MUD ORGANIC MATERIALS OF (LIGNIN, HEMICELLULOSE, ETC.) FIG. 1
102 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and retested them, his report said "all of the acid samples were badly dis- colored and were absolutely without strength while the lime mud sample was much whiter and seemed as strong as ever." He concluded that "from the present samples it appears that the nature of the fiber content and the amount of clay present are not the vital factors but that the damage is probably due to the acidity caused by the alum used in sizing." His con- clusions form the basis of our whole TABLE 1 1958 TESTS ON NATURALLY AGED PAPERS Acid Alkaline Neutral Mfg. Date ............ 1901 1901 1958 Filler .............. Clay Lime Clay mud Fibers (bleached) ...... Wood Wood Wood Tests: Basis weight . 60.8 62.6 60.0 % Ash ............. .7 16.5 18.0 %Filler .33.8 29.5 21.0 pH ............... 3 8.9 6.5-7.0 Mullen .............6 18 18 Fold: Machine direction. 0 8 7 Cross direction... 0 14 7 Tear: Machine direction. 14 44 50 Cross direction.... 13 45 55 approach to the permanency of our printing papers. In reviewing Sutermeister's files, we find much correspondence with other members of TAPPI, with government officials, and with many other scientists, but few showed much active interest. The industry was apathetic because the technology of handling alkaline materi- als, particularly if we were to get siz- ing in the paper, was difficult; it was thought that sizing was essential-but was it? We manufactured much un- sized paper that was successfully printed, especially by letterpress, and made into books. The government's attitude was one of conservatism. "Sutie's" frustration showed through readily in this correspondence, but he and we kept plugging. In time we over- came many of the technological obsta- cles, including the sizing problem. OLD BOOKS AND PAPERS Subsequent research of the literature now verifies much of Sutermeister's work. The oldest paper examined by anyone, that we found in our search, was one reported in a graduate thesis from the Institute of Paper Chemistry in 1937 by F. F. Hanson; he had ob- tained a book dated 1576 which con- tained alternate sections of strong, white sheets and badly degraded, brown sheets. Chemical and physical analyses of the white versus the brown sheets caused Hanson to reach these conclusions: 1. A small amount of calcium car- bonate, remaining behind as a residue from the lime cook, made an unsized rag sheet more resistant to natural aging; the good sheets contained a minimum of about 2 percent calcium carbonate. 2. The pH determined on the water extract is an important factor in the permanence of a sheet of paper. The good sheets had a pH of 7.5 and the poor sheets had a pH of about 4.9 (pH is a measure of hydrogen ion concen- tration; a pH value of 1 is extremely acid, 14 is extremely alkaline, with 7 being neutral-with all gradations be- tween). 3. Oil residues from the printing ink formed weak acids by the oxidation of linseed oil; in the white sheets the calcium carbonate appeared to have neutralized such acids. We examined a series of old books in another analytical study. These in- volved a book made in 1859 of all rag
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 103 paper; it was unsized; it had a pH of 7.5; after 103 years it was in excel- lent condition and still had a fold test value of over 50. This book contrasted with one made in 1891 of all wood fibers, having a pH of 4.4 and a fold of only 1. The third book was made in 1912 of wood fibers and had a pH of 4.8 and a fold of 7. The oldest book could be easily handled, while the other two had to be handled somewhat "like eggs" if they were to be studied by users in the library. Table 1 summarizes work we did in 1958 on Sutermeister's acid and alkaline papers of 1901 vs. a publisher's grade being satisfactorily made and used at that time. Unfortunately, we cannot find the analytical data on these samples at the time they were made. These data were either lost from the files or the tests themselves were made by methods not comparable to those being used today. But it is obvious that the neutral or alkaline pH was the major cause for retention of strength. Those papers are available for ex- amination. The acid one has to be en- closed in a plastic envelope because it is so brittle it would fall apart in one's fingers if handled. The alkaline paper made in 1901 feels as though it were made yesterday. DURABILITY VERSUS PERMANENCE In preparing this article I spent much time in our company files for background information as well as for evidence and proof of our major thesis that a neutral or preferably alkaline sheet of paper connotes permanence. I found much of Sutermeister's writing more poignant than anything I could say; hence I shall quote from his report of 1941. In the strict sense of the word, as defined in a dictionary, there is no such thing as a "perma- nent" paper. This is recognized by the Techni- cal Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry which defines permanence as the degree to which paper resists chemical action which may result from impurities in the paper itself or agents from the surrounding atmosphere. Durability, on the other hand, is defined as the degree to which a paper retains its original qualities under continual usage. The word "usage" should be particularly noted as being very different from storage; usage implies the mechanical handling of the paper. According to these definitions a paper may be highly permanent but not at all durable be- cause, for example, of structural weakness in the original sheet. On the other hand, it may be relatively durable but not permanent although it is difficult to see how any serious chemical degradation can take place without at the same time lowering the durability of the paper. The problem of durability is largely one for the pa- per maker as it depends chiefly on the type of fibrous material used and the treatment given it in the manufacturing operations. The perma- nence of paper also depends on the paper maker but almost equally on storage conditions which are beyond his control. Permanence has received more attention than durability and as far back as 1824 much concern was felt in re- gard to the condition of books and records. ... The washing of the bleached fiber prior to its use in the beater is of some importance in re- gard to permanence. If the soluble chlorides from the bleach residues are not washed out they may react with the alum used in sizing and form hydrochloric acid which is particu- larly harmful to paper and even worse than sulphuric acid. Of the other materials going into paper, rosin and alum are generally ad- mitted to be harmful if used in too large quan- tities as is generally the case with alum. This is the chief reason for the acid condition of rosin sized papers and even the acidity thus caused is very injurious. Conversely, the pres- ence of an alkaline filler such as calcium car- bonate tends to keep the paper in an alkaline condition and prevent its deterioration. The sharp contrast between the acid and alkaline conditions was shown by a package of samples which had been kept in a rather warm place for about 34 years; the acid papers were dark in color and very brittle while those with an alkaline filler were apparently as good as when first made.... It is fully realized that the condi- tions under which a book or document is stored bave a tremendous influence on its longevity.
104 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The factors which mnust be taken into considera- tion are light, heat, air, moisture, dust, gases etc. It is very important that we under- stand the difference between durability and permanence because the latter is the retention of significant use proper- ties while the other is retention of orig- inal quality under continual use. For example, a business machine tabulation card under continual use certainly must be durable and resist handling abuse; a book on the library shelf is con- sulted only occasionally and is handled far more gently. While it does not have to have the same initial strength, it should retain its ability to be con- sulted and endure over a prolonged period of time. If you recall my original statements about fitting the manu- facture of paper to the end use, you will begin to appreciate that book papers can be produced from pure fi- bers and nondeteriorating chemicals which enable it to be uniformly printed, collated, and bound into a permanent book. The strength needed is that re- quired to go efficiently through the various processes of the print shop and the bindery and then to be capable of final usage (reading and/or consulting of it). It would be economically un- sound to use expensive, strong pulps simply to get durability; in addition such fibers do not print well, have no mellowness, or aesthetic appeal. The papermaker balances his so-called fur- nish to meet the end use best, and in the case of book papers there need be no compromise on permanence. The recipe used should be pure pulps with other chemicals added only to the ex- tent that they enable the printing paper to perform its job. If sizing is required, it should be done from an alkaline medium; by sizing we mean sufficient resistance to water to be lithographi- cally printed and/or written upon with water inks if this is indicated. For many years this question of sizing was the excuse for using rosin and alum, but in the 1950s Hercules Powder Company came out with an alkaline sizing material known as "Aquapel"; there are now other competitive prod- ucts on the market. Warren was one of the first to take advantage of this new alkaline sizing material and we developed proprietary methods for in- corporating it into our paper along with the filler, calcium carbonate, which gave permanence through its buffering ability to keep the paper neutral or slightly alkaline. We have made thou- sands of tons of book papers by these techniques over the past twelve to fif- teen years; this paper has been sucess- fully processed through our customer plants and onto library shelves. Fur- thermore, our proprietary techniques for alkaline sizing and filling are through licensing being used in many overseas paper mills. Calcium carbonate is an inert, white, bright pigment; it simply is dormant in the paper and available if any acid is encountered, such as in uncontrolled storage conditions. In other words, calcium carbonate is a slightly alkaline, inert buffer which stands guard against acidic conditions. We believe that all book papers should contain a residual of some calcium carbonate regardless of what other fillers may be present, be they clay or TiO2. The permanence of calcium carbonate itself is attested to by the fact that marble is the purest natural form of calcium carbonate and, as you well know, marble has been used for centuries in the artistic sculptural world for statuary. Other means of obtaining neutral or alkaline conditions can be utilized in tie manufacture of paper, even if they
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 105 are less ideal than the use of our inert filler calcium carbonate. For example, many good and permanent papers are made by combinations of basic body- stock paper plus surface size and/or plus coatings. We have seen in our own work where alkaline coatings such as those containing satin white placed upon a slightly acidic bodystock gave a composite pH on the neutral or alka- line side. For example, we made such a composite coated sheet in 1931 and have followed its natural aging charac- teristics over the years-as shown in figure 2. Its extracted pH is 7.9. Note that we have tried to draw a smooth curve through the average values for Mullen (burst), M.I.T. 1 kg. folding endurance and Elmendorf tear strength (cross and with grain data combined). The test numbers show some variance, probably due to operator, instrument, and/or sampling techniques over such a forty-year span, but it is clear that this coated paper has leveled off in its strength properties with time; it still is in good condition and usable. Parenthetically it should be mentioned that the heavy weight of this type of coating, which was usually applied at that time, put a burden on fold-but it still was sufficient for making into a book. Admittedly, these sandwiches or composites are not ideal, but they are certainly better than a totally acidic paper. The question is just how far down these superimposed layers pene- trate to neutralize any acidity in the base, and when they do, what the ef- fects of the residual neutralized salts are. Obviously, a uniform alkaline or neutral paper throughout its cross-sec- tion is better than a sandwich of differ- ent layers, but if the composite is neu- tral or alkaline, the odds are good that permanence also will be good. TESTING METHODS Methods of testing have been contro- versial in this permanence field for years, and the battle still rages. Suter- meister's work does show, however, that the alkaline theory has stood the test of time of natural aging; witness the 1901 samples already cited. But we cannot wait for fifty or 100 years to do the testing, so we must rely upon accel- erated aging tests such as TAPPI, P453 which is a seventy-two-hour aging at 1050 C, then measuring folding endur- ance; results are expressed as the per- centage of the fold retained after the exposure. Barrow recommends a similar test. But does resistance to simple dry heat indicate permanence or just re- sistance to heat degradation? For this reason, Gray of Eastman Kodak in a paper published in TAPPI (February 1969) feels that moisture should be added to the test. Likewise, Luner in the reference cited earlier recommends a test in which the exposure would be from 80?-100? C but in an atmosphere of 3-8 percent moisture, which he feels would better correspond to the chemi- cal reactions occurring at room tem- perature with time; he recommends the folding test as the best criterion after such exposure. Qualitative spot testing that the Barrow laboratory recommends currently does give quick indications of potential permanence by the mea- sure of pH, groundwood content, and the presence of alum and rosin. Of all these tests, pH determination is the most significant one; we concur in Bar- row's recommendation of 6.5 or above as a good criterion of longevity. The initial physical strength tests, however, we feel do not necessarily have to be fixed but should be correlated with the end use of the paper. The ultimate accelerated test for longevity will be one that not only
NATURAL AGING OF AN ALKALINE COATING ON AN ACID BODYSTOCK 26 z *I- 20 4 34 30~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 26A 10 20 30 4Q YEARS OF AGING FIG. a
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 107 takes into account the initial recipe but also the conditions that the paper will encounter in its processing, usage, and storage. CONVERTING AND STORAGE There are many chemical influences to which a book paper is subjected in its life history. Printing processes in themselves may add chemicals, such as residues from the fountain solutions and/or inks. Generally speaking, the tests from our print shop research in- dicate that these influences are minor- that if calcium carbonate is used it generally will cope with any acidic additive. We have definitely shown a correlation between alkaline pH and good ink drying, especially in the nor- mal relative humidity ranges of the print shop of 40-60 percent. Also, the binding chemicals, the adhesives used there, can have an effect especially if these are acidic; but here again our panacea, calcium carbonate, may well handle this too. Atmospheric exposure, such as to the burning of fossil fuels which may give rise to sulfur dioxide (SO2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) must be taken into account; air conditioning and air filtering should help. Here again, residual calcium carbonate will act as a buffer. Certainly we should avoid light and extremes of tempera- ture and humidity, as well as guarding against the attacks of insects and ver- min. FORECASTING THE FUTURE What about the future? As long as purified cellulosic wood fibers can be obtained economically and under good conservation practices they will prob- ably form the lowest cost substrate for the printed medium, whether the basic paper itself be filled, surface-sized, coated, or converted in some other way. This presumes that materials added to paper do not cause chemical deterio- ration. The best insurance against this, of course, is the neutral buffer, calcium carbonate. Our crystal ball does have a picture of plastics some day filling some role, although their permanence too will have to be established by ade- quate test techniques. Some plastic papers for printing are being made today, especially in Japan, but they are currently so expensive that we need not consider them for general printing uses. Just when the petrochemical or plastic industry can produce a product as low in cost and effective in use as nature's cellulose remains to be weighed as technological progress is made with time. Certainly for the pres- ent and foreseeable future, the work done by Sutermeister and well sub- stantiated and proclaimed by Barrow still holds. The best insurance for per- manence of the printed word is on paper made on the neutral or prefer- ably alkaline side. Present technology is such that book papers can be so made whether they be sized or not, whether they be coated or not. The costs may be slightly higher today, but, as more and more mills shift to alkaline paper manufacturing, this disadvantage should disappear. Librar- ians can have confidence in this ap- proach to making paper-and their future worries about permanence will be minimized.
DISCUSSION GREER ALLEN Joseph J. Thomas has recounted the way in which the S. D. Warren Paper Company shifted its book paper pro- duction to papers of higher alkalinity- thus insuring, according to current re- search, papers of greater permanence. This is a remarkable history of Yankee opportunism and good luck. The com- pany managed to arrange its methods some years back to solve problems that were to reach critical magnitude half a century later. This was Mr. Thomas's assignment, to discuss the making of permanent book papers. His technical presenta- tion of the subject is impressive as be- fits his eminent qualifications. I am in no position to criticize it, because I am a printer rather than a paper chemist. My assignment is to comment on the printer's reaction to the emphasis on permanence and durability in papers as compared to other qualities that are necessary to produce good printing. Elsewhere in these papers, Leonard Shatzkin discusses these qualities from the standpoint of a publisher. I shall take you into the shop where such standard but diversified items as paper, ink, type, presses, folding machines, binding thread, and glue have to be arranged and managed in order to pro- duce a good book. It is important for the printer to have a voice in the great permanence and durability debate. Usually when- ever people assemble to discuss pro- cesses and solutions to the problems of bringing modern commercial publish- ing papers to a state of longevity that they have not heretofore enjoyed, the exchange of views is restricted to three principal parties: the papermaker, the publisher, and the librarian. Surely, I would not want to omit one of these. Each spends a great deal of time per- forming some critical service con- nected with the life of the paper in question. But it is only natural that when they get together each seeks to grind a particular axe. It is only fair, since the printer is equally involved, for him to have a turn at the grind- stone. The papermaker recounts how he has been introducing chemicals and manufacturing systems which precipi- tate and neutralize impurities, conjur- ing up (as he goes along) visions akin to those soapsuds commercials on tele- vision, where we are treated to a view of smiling, eager little enzymes gob- bling up a veritable panoply of offend- ing ingredients. Then there is the publisher, oppressed on the one hand by the stringent de- mands of purchasing committees to make his books withstand abuses from an ever more licensed and uncontained body of young people; chided on the other by the librarian who seems never so smug and delighted as when he is pointing to browned edges and frayed bindings; and finally he is constrained by an awareness of his own reputation -that marketable yet elusive asset, the view taken of him by his buying public, his agents (the bookstores), and (quite vital) his authors. The third man in the discussion is the custodian of books, the librarian him- self. He is never quite sure whether he 108
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 109 is serving learning by making his vol- umes convenient to the readers or run- ning a sort of "geriatric nursing home" for decrepit books; and all the while he thrashes about trying to find a culprit on whom to pin the ills of his deterio- rating charges. The view of the commercial printer- and-binder in relation to paper perma- nence is rarely called for, hardly ever articulated; it is generally misunder- stood and more often than anything, it is inaccurately presumed. Consequently I am writing, not as a service-oriented printer in a great research and teaching institution (where responsibility beyond one's immediate purview is part of the job), but I aim to set forth the views of "the average commercial printer" touching permanence in paper. I imagine that there is a general eagerness to hear what he thinks about; because it is for him and not for me, that Mr. Thomas and his brothers in industry churn their Fourdrinier ma- chines so endlessly; and it is to him, and not to me, that Mr. Shatzkin (and his publishing colleagues) turn to have their many new titles and reprints fab- ricated each year. And finally, Mr. So- derland must admit that his library shelves are filled to the brim, not with a harvest from my presses but from his. The concern of the average commer- cial printer for paper permanence is re- markable. Is the reader ready to dis- cover it? I seriously wonder if he can take it. The truth is that the average commercial printer could not care less. He "does not give a damn" (if I may quote one informant in my recent survey). Despite responsible-sounding sales talks and other public utterances which he feels obliged to make, just catch such a printer over a martini after a day filled with machine costs, tax ad- justments, wage settlements, and work spoilage. Then he will own that perma- nence in paper is just not very high on his list of pressing distractions. I stress his position because it is im- portant to know it. As we comb over the finer points of technology, we had better remember this small (but crit- ical) slice of reality and drop in a pinch now and then to leaven our debates. When I claimed earlier that the com- mercial printer's position is inaccurate- ly presumed, I meant that too often we realize in a benumbed sort of way that the printer is not very bothered about paper permanence; yet underlying all this is a stifled sense of outrage be- cause, "God knows, he most certainly ought to be! " Therein lies the problem. The printer operates in a highly com- petitive market with a rather mean profit margin. Unless the world can make it worth his while (in dollars and cents) to exercise a preference for per- manent papers (or at least to feel equiv- ocal about printing on them), then we will get nowhere in overcoming his in- difference. This is not surprising. Others involved in the debate have economic interests, too. Concern for permanence has, of course, been profitable (yea, vitall) for librarians. Who would be a custodian for long if he were expected to spend his time among shelves of crumbled, pulverized fragments which had once been books? The published, as another party, feels the dollar pinch when, for example, he loses a large state adoption because his sample book did not hold up as it careened through that ingenious bibliographic amusement park: the text-book testing laboratory. And Mr. Thomas can recount (if not measure precisely) the tangible benefits reaped by at least one papermaker who early grew concerned about self-destruction in paper, took manufacturing steps to
110 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY end it, and was not at all bashful about letting his customers (the publishers) know just what he had done. But commercial printers (except for a handful of highly specialized book manufacturers and binders) are at best unconcerned and more typically quite ignorant of these matters. Printers fa- miliar with permanence view it as a quality on which a few particular cli- ents insist and one which often com- pounds the already complex problem of getting the ink down on the paper as quickly as possible-all the while meet- ing prearranged quality standards. To get the printer who is involved in paper selection interested in perma- nence we will have to show him, on the one hand, that specifying permanent papers is an important service to his clients and, on the other, that it will cost him no more than it is worth in dollars and cents-either in cash or in terms of production time. In doing this, the paper manufacturer will have to see to it that "paper made to last" carries the same built-in defenses against the common printing and binding ills that all well-constructed printing papers now carry. Let me share with you some of my experiences with permanized papers and describe a few of the critical qualities which concern the printer. For example, a few years ago, at a time when we were becoming eager to avoid self-destructive papers and were proceeding with some degree of success in selecting publishing sheets with a preference for less acidity, we encountered a client who insisted that his job be run on a paper with the highest pH factor we could find. The job in question was an offset book with small halftones. It carried photos of equipment in subtle gradations to dis- tinguish essential details. We tested a number of sheets and found a shocking- ly positive correlation between acidity and clear reproduction; the more alka- line sheets available at the time just would not hold the best images. When faced with the decision between pub- lishing on a more permanent sheet and obtaining the best photoreproduction, (I told him we would not "stand behind the reproduction on just any old sheet") this very responsible client knuckled under and selected the acid content sheet. The job was completed, and I have not heard if the books are still intact. Two factors concerned us as printers in this particular case: brightness and ink holdout. Brighter, whiter papers permit halftone dot photoreproductions to show the maximum contrast between black and white and consequent defini- tion of detail. Ink holdout is the ability of the paper to trap the ink chemicals on the paper surface, to dry right there, and in doing so to permit the ink to show off its varnished shine and its blackness. Thus it does not sink deep into the paper leaving the image lifeless and washed out. Here, very poignantly, is the conflict between responsibility and reputation. If we had run the job on the alkaline sheet, all the world would have seen "what miserable print- ers we are." Take another case. It may indicate why printers shy from involvement in what appear to be experiments. It illus- trates what I meant earlier when I said that permanence and durability must be built into papers without altering the printing and handling characteristics which the printer has grown to expect if he is to become anything but livid when confronted with the sheets. This is the tale of a client who did not knuckle under and of a university print- er who unwittingly walked smack into a technological mine field.
ALKALINE PRINTING PAPERS 111 When we contemplate printing on acetate, or vegetable parchment, or some vinyl-coated substance, we of course, make tests and careful inquiries to select the proper inks, drying agents, and sprays to be sure the sheets will dry promptly without offsetting (that is, allowing the wet image to print on the underside of the sheet above it, in the delivery pile). But when we prepare to print on a so-called text or antique finish book paper, we (and other job printers like us) have found from gen- eral experience that the behavior of all these sheets falls within normal param- eters; or, in other words, the press- man knows what to expect when he puts the job on the press. He might have to dope up his ink, add driers, extenders (thinners), adjust the litho- graphic water-ink balance, or repack his impression cylinder to obtain the most suitable pressure; but he usually feels he is working within limits that he knows. However, on the particular job I am about to describe, the client called for a specific brand name of paper. The sheet was one constructed primarily as a per- manent and durable paper-which in- deed it was and is ! But its printing qualities (as printers have come to know them) appear to have been sec- ondary considerations in its manufac- ture. For one thing, it was rather more transparent than sheets of similar sub- stance. Its opacity was low. To over- come this, we increased the weight of the paper selected from seventy pounds per standard ream to eighty, knowing full well that it might double the sheet- work (the folding and sewing). But it seemed worth the effort and the cost. When we put it on the offset press and applied the usual amount of ink, we found that it did not behave in the expected way. Our pressman experi- mented with it; after much delay, he found that we could run the sheets with- out offsetting, but with the result that the image was weaker than we would have wished it to be. On later investiga- tion we found that an obscure additive would have inhibited the offsetting ade- quately. We folded the sheets without mis- hap and sewed them successfully. The job was to be a paperback with glued- on covers. We put it on our covering machine only to find that the paper re- pelled our natural adhesives. We lifted the job and rushed it to another binder whose polyvinyl actetate emulsion suc- ceeded admirably in gluing the covers to the books and meeting the deadline. This account will show the sorts of traps a printer may stumble into unless such papers come to him with better information and warnings. The second time around, of course, it was easy. Admittedly, this was a rather abrupt introduction to printing on permanent papers-ideal from the standpoint of paper endurance, but it tried the endur- ance of the printer who was as ill pre- pared as most commercial printers tend to be under similar conditions, because most of the permanized publication pa- pers to which the printer must be intro- duced possess printing and binding properties indistinguishable from their acidic siblings. Now we have covered brightness, opacity, receptivity to adhesives, ink- holdout, and drying qualities. What are some of the other paper characteristics which mean so much to us printers? Several fall under the heading of run- ability: "How will the sheet run or feed through systems in which the sheet is passed from the skid at the feed end of the press by an elaborate system of vacuum cups, little metal gripping fin-
112 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY gers, positioning guides, tape conveying belts and rolls to a pile of printed sheets at the delivery end of the press?" Di- mensional stability and flatness are two vital concerns in running a job. The sheets simply cannot vary in size on a high-speed, carefully calibrated modern press. They will crumble and bunch up. Nor can they be anything but flat. The vacuum feed-system will not pick up sheets from a wobbly, wavy skid of pa- per. Here moisture stability is impor- tant, the critical property in a paper which must remain flat under normal conditions. Moisture stability figures prominent- ly in the next general area, printability: the ease with which ink can be trans- ferred onto the paper and stay there the way we want it to. Again, moisture con- tent affects paper's receptivity to ink. Here, too, we should consider the smoothness of the surface. In letterpress printing, of course, it must be sufficient- ly smooth; for offset lithography it can- not be porous. Nor can the sheets afford to pick (lose surface fibres) or to carry paper dust on their surfaces or edges, which will end as unsightly spots on the printed pages. Another general heading includes bindimg and handling qualities. Is the bulk or caliper uniform? Covers are preprinted, boxes made, and machines set for certain prearranged thiicknesses of books. They cannot vary from stan- dard without bringing on disaster. The sheets, too, must be strong enough to withstand the ordeal of folding and sew- ing, or simply getting through roll-fed, high-speed, web-press systems. Then there are the aesthetic proper- ties of color and what (for want of a better phrase) is termed in the trade "a bookish feel." Although these tend to appear arbitrary, if a bit traditional, they are nonetheless real to the printer. So we see that a number of hidden concerns and factors must be known and attended to as printers are enlisted into the general march toward perma- nence and durability. Certainly the printers' ignorance and indifference can block progress just as their intelligent participation can speed things up. To enlist that intelligent participation, pro- ponents of greater permanence and du- rability in printing papers need also to understand and take into account the qualities that a printer seeks in papers.