PUBLIC OPINION TOWARD USER FEES IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES' Mark T. Kinnucan,2 Mark R. Ferguson,3 and Leigh Estabrook4 The issue of user fees in public libraries has been debated extensively in the library community in the last several years. Since their origins in the nine- teenth century, American public libraries have relied almost exclusively on public funding. An examination of their nature as public goods, however, re- veals public library services to be as much private goods as public goods. This conclusion based on economic grounds is supported by surveys of pub- lic opinion toward user fees in libraries, which have typically found the gen- eral public to be more tolerant of fees than librarians. In this study, we re- analyzed the data from a national telephone poll of 1,181 U.S. residents conducted in 1991 by the Library Research Center at the University of Illi- nois. When asked what they would like to see done if their local public li- brary were facing a fiscal crisis, 47 percent of those voicing an opinion fa- vored raising taxes, while 44 percent favored instituting user fees. The remaining 9 percent advocated a reduction in services. We used the frame- work of discrete choice analysis to determine whether attitudes toward fees and taxes stem more from citizens' own self-interests or more from their po- litical outlook. We found greater support for self-interest as an explanation. In particular, more frequent library use, urban residence, a higher level of education, and greater income were all associated with a greater preference for taxes over fees or service cuts. Introduction Whether or not to charge fees for library services is a difficult question for many public librarians. The issue has been thoroughly debated in 1. This article is a revision of a paper that was presented at Library Research Seminar I, Talla- hassee, Florida, November 1996. 2. PSI, 3030 North Rocky Point Drive West, Tampa, Florida 33607. This research was con- ducted while Mark T. Kinnucan was in the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University of Western Ontario. 3. Compusearch, 330 Front Street, Toronto, Ontario M5V 3B7, Canada. This research was con- ducted while Mark R. Ferguson was in the Department of Geography at the University of Toronto; support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada through its funding of a postdoctoral fellowship at the University ofToronto is acknowledged. 4. Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign, 501 East Daniel Street, Champaign, Illinois 61820. [Libravy Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 183-204] 3 1998 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/98/6802-0003$02.00 183
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the library community [1, 2], where there is a prevailing sentiment against the imposition of fees [3]. Although debates over fees have been carried on for decades, they gained new currency in the 1980s with the financial cutbacks faced by many public libraries and with the introduction of various electronic services and media into public librar- ies [4]. Both trends have continued and, in some cases, have been mag- nified in the 1990s. Furthermore, the past decade and a half have seen the rise of significant pushes for smaller government and privatization of services among both academic economists and government policy makers. This trend also has implications for the "fee versus free" de- bate in public libraries. It is not clear that the general public shares the aversion to user fees expressed by most librarians. In fact, public opinion seems to be di- vided on the issue. In the survey underlying the present research, nearly half of the respondents to a hypothetical question favored user fees as a means for their local public library to respond to a fiscal crisis. A similar division of opinion was evident in a survey conducted twenty years ago [5]. The purpose of the present study is to assess the determinants of public opinion on this issue. Are there clear socioeconomic and loca- tional characteristics among the people who approve (or do not ap prove) of fees in public libraries? Are there readily identifiable reasons for why the views of the public may differ from those of the library community? In answering these questions, we have divided the article into two major sections. The first section reviews important back- ground matters such as the origins of public libraries, the issue of pub- lic versus private goods, and research on public opinion toward govern- ment spending in general. Insight from this discussion will form the basis for the second major section, a bivariate and multivariate statisti- cal analysis of the current survey data. Most public libraries in North America trace their roots to the second half of the nineteenth century. Many reasons can be identified for the widespread adoption of public governance and tax support for libraries at that point in history. One reason is the belief at the time that libraries would provide benefits to their potential users, in many cases the urban poor, which those potential users would have difficulty identifying for themselves [6]. Such benefits included the molding of a more edu- cated and enlightened citizenry and, for some proponents, a more trac- table populace [7]. In this way the perceived benefits of free public libraries were very similar to those of universal education [8]. In both cases, the benefits were thought to accrue to society as a whole at least as much as to the specific recipients of the services. Both public librar- ies and public education were seen to be public goods. For the most
USER FEES 185 part, the development of public libraries was part of the same social movement that led to the establishment of universal, compulsory, free education [9]. Public Goods and Private Goods But are libraries and their services public goods? As P. Giacoma [4] explains, there are several different ways to answer this question. In one respect it can be treated strictly as an economic question. In an economic analysis, public goods and private goods can be differenti- ated along several dimensions [10]. The two that are most commonly identified are excludability and "rivalness" [4, 11]. A good is exclud- able to the extent that "free riding" can be prevented; that is, it is excludable to the extent that nonpurchasers of the good are prevented from benefiting from it. A good exhibits rivalness to the extent that consumption by one person precludes consumption by another. Pri- vate goods are excludable and rival; public goods are not. By these two criteria, library services can be thought of as either pri- vate goods or public goods, largely depending on whether the library is thought of as providing materials or information [12]. Consider ri- valry first. It is clear that a book or a periodical article can be read by only one person at a time. The book or article is a rival good. But the information in the book or article is not consumed by the reader in the same way that groceries or gasoline are consumed. Since informa- tion can be passed on without being consumed, the information itself is nonrival [11]. Excludability is similarly difficult to enforce. Libraries could conceivably operate like golf or tennis clubs-nonmembers could be barred at the door. Indeed, subscription libraries were com- monplace 150 years ago. But it is exceedingly difficult to contain infor- mation only among those who have paid for it or are otherwise entitled to it. Secrets are hard to keep, and gossips abound.5 The questions surrounding public and private goods are not merely of academic interest. Research has been driven, since the 1970s, by the move to privatize various government enterprises. The public choice school in economics, especially, has championed privatization. For ex- ample, in a historical look at policing and highways in Britain, B. L. 5. One of the classic examples of a public good is the lighthouse, the purpose of which is to provide information. It is interesting to note, in light of the further discussion below, that although lighthouses have been cited by economic theorists as examples of public goods at least sinceJohn Stuart Mill, an examination of the history of the financing of lighthouses in England shows them actually to have had, and to continue to have, considerable private funding [131.
186 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Benson [14] argued that the eventual development of government pro- vision of these services toward the end of the Middle Ages and in the modern era was not because of their intrinsic publicness. Instead, the evolving definition of property rights led private individuals to underin- vest in the provision of such services. Benson's analysis suggests "an array of possible policy prescriptions involving the internalization of various costs and benefits through privatization of rights" [14, p. 269]. Other economists and policy analysts have taken the opposite position: "Where there is good government the provisions [of public goods] can often be as efficient, and more equitable, than are the provisions of market goods to people with unequal incomes" [15, p. 71]. Although the distinction between public and private goods is often presented as a dichotomy, economists are actually more inclined to think of it as a continuum. Several economists have developed and carried out analyses that attempt to measure the degree of publicness of various government services, especially local government services. Two of these studies are illustrative. R. A. Gonzalez, T. S. Means, and S. L. Mehay [16] investigated five municipal services, including public libraries, in nine states. They developed regression equations to mea- sure the publicness of the different services, carrying out a separate analysis for each service. They reasoned that for the services to be con- sidered public goods, consumption of them should be invariant with city population and average income. These hypotheses stem from the definition of public goods as nonexcludable and nonrival. Gonzalez et al. used municipal expenditures on the different services as a measure of consumption. They found that the best fitting parame- ter values were more consistent with the services being private goods, although in a fair number of cases, including about half of the library equations, the results were indeterminate. Nonetheless, they con- cluded that the outcome of their study "adds some strength to support- ers of privatization and weakens support for local government consoli- dation" [16, p. 532]. These conclusions can be questioned based on the authors' choice of a measure of consumption. If, as was mentioned earlier, the public good that libraries provide is information, it is not at all clear that library expenditures can serve as a proxy for the con- sumption of library services. The second study concerns the publicness of education [17]. Public libraries have many connections to education, both historically, as out- lined above, and at present. For example, three of the nine possible roles for public libraries identified in the Public Library Association's Planning and Role Settingfor Public Libraries [18] are educational in na- ture, and one of them (Formal Education Support Center) makes a
USER FEES 187 direct link to schools. In fact, this role was rated as most important in a public opinion poll, and the other two educational roles were rated second and third [19]. J. H. Wyckoff [17] investigated the publicness of primary and second- ary education, using a very different approach than that of Gonzalez et al. [16]. Wyckoff measured publicness by estimating private and social demand for education separately and then calculating publicness as social demand's portion of total demand, which was defined simply as the sum of social and private demand. Wyckoff figured that social de- mand could be estimated from the level of support for public schools provided by taxpayers without children in school. Using data from a survey conducted immediately after a school operating referendum in Marshall, Michigan, Wyckoff estimated social demand to be 10 percent of total demand; however, a large margin of error meant that social demand could only be pegged with confidence at between 0 percent and 50 percent of total demand. In other words, education is more private good than public good, but its benefits are not entirely private. The social benefit that goods with some public quality provide are often referred to as positive externalities. Externalities are the benefits provided by the good to those who are not direct consumers. Nancy A. Van House [11] noted that there is an efficiency reason and an equity reason for public involvement in the production of goods that generate positive externalities. The efficiency reason is if nonconsum- ers derive some of the benefits, but consumers bear all of the costs, consumption will be lower than is optimal because the consumers are not, in a sense, getting their money's worth. Some public provision lowers the cost, stimulating more consumption. The equity reason is simply that if nonconsumers are deriving some of the benefits, it makes sense that they share some of the costs. Most observers believe that, like public schools, public libraries pro- vide a mix of social and private benefits. Empirical studies of the bene- fits of libraries have either supported this view or, as with the study by Gonzalez et al., presented ambiguous results. One might expect, therefore, that the funding of public libraries would reflect a similar mix of public and private sources of revenue. Such is not the case, of course. American public libraries currently receive 93 percent of their operating funds from various levels of government [20]. Only 3 percent comes from fees and charges, including overdue fines. (The other 4 percent is attributable to private donations and a category labeled only as "other.") Although fees have constituted an increasingly important source of revenue for some local government services [21], such has not been the case for libraries.
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Public Opinion toward Taxes, Fees, and Government Spending The decision of whether or not to have user fees in public libraries is more a political decision than an economic one: "If citizens reject fees for the circulation of best-sellers from their libraries, economic reason- ing to the contrary, they have decided that the provision and use of best-sellers constitute a public good, which should be made available at taxpayer expense" [4, p. 93]. And voters continue to make this deci- sion. In 1994, fifty out of fifty-four public library operating referenda passed in the United States with a combined margin of victory of 63 percent in favor to 37 percent opposed [22]. It is important to understand the factors that influence public opin- ion on the funding of public libraries. Although there is little previous research on this specific question or on public attitudes toward user charges as a way to fund any government program, extensive research has been conducted on the bases of public attitudes toward taxes and spending on various government programs. Two main factors that are typically identified in these studies are political orientation and economic self-interest (for example, [23- 25]). On the one hand, voters' attitudes toward government spending are thought to arise from how the voters resolve for themselves the "dialectic interplay between two dominant social ideologies: economic individualism or the work ethic and social equality or collective respon- sibility" [25, p. 1029]. On the other hand, voters are hypothesized to support tax policies and spending programs that benefit themselves. Since public opinion surveys seldom include questions on whether the respondent is a recipient of benefits from particular government pro- grams (but see [25] and [26] for exceptions), demographic variables are often used as proxies for self-interest. The evidence on the relevant importance of these factors or, indeed, their strength as predictors of attitudes toward taxes and spending at all, is mixed. In a study of attitudes toward spending on primarily federal-level programs, A. Sanders [26] found ideology (measured as political party affiliation) to be a stronger determinant of attitudes than was self-interest. Y. Hasenfeld and J. A. Rafferty [25] found essentially the opposite in their study of attitudes toward welfare programs. In- deed, they went on to provide evidence from a path analysis that politi- cal ideology itself derives in part from self-interest. Two studies looked specifically at citizen attitudes toward local gov- ernment taxes and services. P. A. Beck, H. G. Rainey, and C. Traut [23] developed linear structural relations (LISREL) models to explore public attitudes about taxes and services in three Florida cities. They found that community disaffection (a subset of their set of sociopoliti-
USER FEES 189 cal attitude variables) and economic disadvantage (a subset of their set of self-interest variables) were about equally important in predicting residents' preferences for raising taxes or cutting services when faced with a hypothetical forced choice. In another study involving Florida residents,J. E. Benton andJ. L. Daly [24] also investigated the effects of self-interest and political predispositions on voters' inclinations toward raising taxes to improve local services, but they added a third category of predictors to their regression equations: community involvement. The self-interest variables had a slight edge in predictive capacity over the other two categories, although the equations failed to account for much of the variability in tax attitudes. Overall, these studies show that both self-interest and political atti- tudes help shape attitudes toward taxes and government services, with self-interest perhaps enjoying somewhat greater importance. Although he did not focus on the question of self-interest, G. D'Elia [27] looked specifically at attitudes toward public library funding. In a telephone survey of 1,001 Americans, D'Elia asked, among other things, how much money per capita the respondents thought their community should spend annually on public libraries. As part of the question, the respondents were told the minimum, maximum, and average of what American communities actually do spend annually per capita on public libraries ($4, $100, and $16, respectively). D'Elia found that the aver- age amount suggested was $34, over twice the actual average. In a series of separate statistical tests, D'Elia found that there were small but statistically significant effects of several demographic vari- ables and of library use on suggested per capita library spending. Li- brary users, people in the Northeast, people with more education, Afri- can-Americans, Hispanics, and students favored more spending on libraries. The present research differs from D'Elia's study in three ways. First, the funding question asked specifically about user fees and cutting ser- vices as alternatives to raising taxes to fund library services. Second, the questionnaire included a question relating to political outlook, so that its importance could be compared to that of the demographic and library use questions that are assumed to underlie self-interest explana- tions of attitudes toward library funding. Finally, we use a multivariate approach, which allows us some amount of statistical control in the presence of multiple correlated independent variables. The Data The data for this study were collected in a national telephone poll by the Library Research Center at the University of Illinois in the fall of
190 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 1 RESPONSES TO THE QUESTION ON FUNDING OF PUBLIC LJBRAPJES % of Those with Funding Source Number % of Total an Opinion Increase taxes 515 43.6 47.2 Charge for use 481 40.7 44.1 Reduce services 95 8.0 8.7 Don't know/no answer 90 7.6 . Total 1,181 1991 [3]. The sample was developed with random digit dialing. Tele- phone numbers were generated by adding four digits chosen at ran- dom to an initial sample of area code and telephone exchange combi- nations. The area codes and exchanges were selected from a national universe listing in such a way as to produce a sample that was stratified by state and area code. There were 1,181 respondents in the survey, although some respon- dents did not answer all of the twenty or so questions in the question- naire.6 With this sample size, the margin of error on percentages is ? 2.9 percent at the 95 percent confidence level. Sixty percent of the respondents were female. Eighty-five percent of the respondents were white, 8 percent were African-American, 3 per- cent were Hispanic, 2 percent were Asian-Americans, and 2 percent were of other ethnicity. The respondents ranged in age from eighteen to 100 years. The average age was 41.7 years. Sixty-one percent of the respondents had at least some postsecondary education, and 31 per- cent had at least a bachelor's degree. Twenty-nine percent of the re- spondents who reported their income had incomes under $25,000, and 20 percent had incomes over $60,000. Thirty-five percent of the re- spondents described their place of residence as rural, 37 percent as suburban, and 28 percent as urban. The respondents also rated their political outlook on a scale from 1 (liberal) to 10 (conservative). The ratings ranged from 1 to 10; the average rating was 5.5. In addition to demographic items, the questionnaire included a number of questions regarding opinions about public libraries. Several of the latter had to do with library collection policies on controversial materials and videos of current Hollywood movies [3]. The dependent variable in our analysis was based on the question "What would you like to see done if your local public library were fac- ing a fiscal crisis?" The choices given were increasing taxes, charging for use, and reducing services. Table 1 presents the breakdown of re- 6. As a result, only 918 observations were utilized in the multivariate analysis to follow.
USER FEES 191 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Male Female FIG. 1.-Percent supporting the various options, by gender of the respondent. x2 (2) = 10.0; P = .007. Shaded bar = taxes; white bar = fees; black bar = cuts. sponses. Increasing taxes held a slight edge over instituting fees.7 Cut- ring services was a distant third. Bivariate Results Figures 1-5 show the results of cross-tabulating several different pre- dictors with the responses to the funding question. Men are slightly more favorable toward the use of taxes for supporting the library than women (fig. 1). Support for taxes increases with the number of library 7. Not only is the difference between these two options close to the margin of error, but it is also worth noting that the "don't knows" have a large enough percentage that if they decided overwhelmingly in favor of fees, the outcome would shift as well.
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 60% 50% 40% 30% Taxes 20% -0- Fees Cuts 10% 0% None 1to5 6to 11 12ormore FIG. 2.-Percent supporting the various options, by numbers of visits to the public library in the last year. X2 (6) = 47.8; P = 1.3 X 10-8. visits per year (fig. 2), with level of education (fig. 3), and with income (fig. 4) of respondents. City dwellers are most favorable to taxes, subur- banites are second most favorable, and rural residents are least favor- able (fig. 5) to taxes. In general, when support for taxes increases with changes in the level of a factor, it is more at the expense of support for fees than at the expense of support for service cuts. Two variables that were not significantly related to funding attitudes were political outlook and age. The former is especially noteworthy since political outlook was found to correlate with spending attitudes in several of the studies reviewed above. Discrete Choice Analysis Given the lack of independence among the predictor variables pre- sented in the previous section-for example, library use is strongly cor-
USER FEES 193 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% *Taxes 20% Fees < ' ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Cuts 10% 0% No HS degree HS grad Some college College grad GradlProf school FIG. 3.-Percent supporting the various options, by level of education. X2 (8) = 48.6; P = 7.6 x 10-8. related with both level of education and income-it is important to determine the factors that influence funding attitudes when the influ- ence of other variables has been factored in (that is, to use a multivari- ate approach). The appropriate multivariate technique in this situation is one in which the dependent variable is categorical. Therefore, the technique we use is a discrete choice analysis [28]. This technique, which has been used previously in library and infor- mation science by A. Sone [29], proceeds from the assumption that decision makers are rational utility maximizers who associate a certain attractiveness, or utility, with each of the different options. For a variety of reasons, however, these utilities are unobservable to the researcher [28, p. 56]; hence, the best approach is to represent them as random variables governed by a probability distribution. On this basis, it be- comes possible to calculate choice probabilities from the expected lev- els of utility for the different alternatives in the choice set. Note that
194 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 60% 50% 40% t 30% *TaXeS 20% 10% 0% I I Under $15,000 $25,000 $40,000 Over S15,000 to to to $60,000 $25,000 $40,000 *60,000 FIG. 4.-Percent supporting the various options, by income. X2 (8) = 29.7; P = .0002. a distinction is made between the unobservable true utility U, charac- terized by a probability distribution, and the expected utility V, which is estimated as part of the modeling process and which defines the mean of the probability distribution. D. McFadden [30] showed that if one assumes the utility U,i, which choice maker n associates with alternative i, follows a Gumbel distribu- tion, then the multinomial logit (MNL) model can be derived in the context of a random utility framework. McFadden, in fact, was the first person to derive the MNL model from a firm theoretical basis consis- tent with random utility. In a mathematical sense, the multinomial logit is the same model as the model used in polychotomous logistic regres- sion; however, the latter is not derived from the random utility frame- work. The mathematical form of the MNL model is Pn(i) = exp(Vni)/[k exp(Vnk)],
USER FEES 195 60% 50% 40% 30% Taxes 20% - Fees ' Cuts 10% 0% Rural Suburban Urban FIG. 5.-Percent supporting the various options, by the type of community in which the respondent resides. X2 (4) = 26.3; P = .0003. with i and j varying from 1 to L, where L is the number of alternatives and Vis as defined above. In the discrete choice model, true utility U is expressed as a linear function of the set of predictor variables. The regression coefficients are estimated with maximum likelihood tech- niques. The relation between Vni and U,,i is given by Uni = V,i + Eni, where Eni is a Gumbel distributed error component. One potential problem with the MNL model is its assumption that the ratio of choice probabilities for any two alternatives does not de- pend on the presence of other alternatives in the choice set. This as- sumption goes by the acronym IIA, for "independence of irrelevant alternatives." In the present context, for example, the IIA assumption says that a respondent would have the same relative preference for rais- ing taxes over instituting fees, regardless of whether reducing services is also under consideration. It sometimes happens, though, that people's relative preferences are influenced by other alternatives.
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A common solution to the problem has been the use of a nested multinomial logit model (NMNL) rather than the simple MNL. If it is anticipated that some of the alternatives in the choice set form a natu- ral subset, then NMNL can be used to explicitly model different pat- terns of relationship with the dependent variable: one within subsets and one between subsets. If IIA does hold, the NMNL model is equivalent to the ordinary multinomial logit. A useful strategy, therefore, is to start out by estimat- ing a NMNL. In the process, a statistical test can be conducted of whether the nested structure can be rejected in favor of the simple MNL, which is computationally and conceptually more straighifor- ward. When we conducted this test in our analysis, we found no evi- dence of violation of IIA-the simple MNL adequately described the data. Discrete choice analysis was originally developed in the context of modeling actual choice behavior. Whether it can also be applied to survey data is sometimes questioned, especially by economists. None- theless, discrete choice models are routinely used to model stated pref- erences, for example, in marketing research. Such applications obvi- ously make the assumption that the choices indicated by participants are indicative of their true underlying preferences, rather than as a result of extrinsic considerations. Bearing this caveat in mind, we pro- ceed with the analysis. Results of the Discrete Choice Analysis The definition and coding of the variables is presented in table 2, while the results of the model are presented in table 3. The interpretation of such a model is more complex than that of a regression model. The choice probabilities and utilities in a discrete choice model are deter- mined on a relative basis; that is, the effect of a predictor on one alter- native is meaningful only when the alternative's attractiveness is inter- preted in relation to some reference alternative. For each of the independent variables, the number of parameters is one less than the number of alternatives. For example, consider a model with three alternatives, as is the case in this article. If a predictor has a differential effect on choices among the three alternatives, then two parameters will be needed. If one alternative is affected differently than the reference alternative, while the other is affected the same as the reference alternative, one parameter will capture the effect. We arbitrarily chose to make "raising taxes" the reference alternative.
USER FEES 197 TABLE 2 DESCRIPTION AND CODING OF VARLABLES IN DiscRETE CHOICE ANALwSis Variable Description LIBFREQ 0 if person has not visited library in past year 1 if person has visited the library 1-5 times in the past year 2 if person has visited the library 6-11 times in the past year 3 if person has visited the library 12 or more times in the past year MALE I if person is male; 0 if person is female CHILD 1 if the person has children aged between 5 and 18 years; 0 if not XHIGHSC 1 if person did not complete high school; 0 otherwise HIGHSC I if person completed up to high school; 0 otherwise SPOST 1 if person has some postsecondary education; 0 otherwise COLLEGE 1 if person has a college degree; 0 otherwise (The reference category "possession of a graduate/professional degree" is defined when the four educational dummy variables are all 0.) LOWINC 1 if income is less than $15,000; 0 otherwise LOWMID 1 if income is between $15,000 and $25,000; 0 otherwise MID 1 if income is between $25,000 and $40,000; 0 otherwise HIGHMID 1 if income is between $40,000 and $60,000; 0 otherwise (The reference category "income greater than $60,000" is defined when the four income dummy variables are all 0.) URBAN 1 if the person lives in an urban area; 0 otherwise SUBURBAN 1 if the person lives in a suburban area; 0 otherwise (The reference category "person lives in a rural area" is defined when the two locational variables are 0.) NoTE.-Variables relating to the age of the person, the possession of a computer by the person, the size of the community in which the person lives, and political orientation were tested in the analysis and found not to be important. Hence, detailed descriptions of these variables are not included here. Thus, the columns of table 3 are labeled "Fees vs. Taxes" and "Cuts vs. Taxes." The coefficients in the left column relate to the comparison of insti- tuting fees with raising taxes, while those in the right column relate to the comparison of reducing services with raising taxes. If a coefficient is positive, it means that higher values of that independent variable are associated with an increase in the likelihood that the respondent will choose the related alternative at the expense of the "raising taxes" alternative. If a coefficient is negative, higher values of the independent variable will lead to an increase in the relative likelihood of raising taxes. A reference category must be established for each categorical pre- dictor in the model, as well as for the categorical dependent variable. Table 2 indicates the reference category for each of the categorical predictors. A person who is a member of each of these reference cate- gories is female, has no children between the ages of five and eighteen years, has a graduate degree, has an income greater than $60,000, and
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 3 PARAMETER VALUES FOR DiscRETE CHOICE MODEL OF ATiTUDES TOWARD PUBuC LIBRARY FUNDING Variable Fees vs. Taxes Cuts vs. Taxes CONSTANT .053 (.196) -1.808 (-3.174) LIBFREQ -.297 (-4.896) -.327 (-2.860) MALE -.530 (-1.783) CHILD .537 (2.032) ... XHIGHSC 1.153 (3.338) HIGHSC .808 (3.260) ... SPOST .497 (2.059) ... COLLEGE .281 (1.094) -1.654 (-2.064) LOWINC ... 1.838 (3.272) LOWMID ... 1.397 (2.611) MID . .. .967 (1.852) HIGHMID ... .768 (1.404) URBAN -.640 (-3.421) -.915 (-2.602) SUBURBAN -.156 (.912) -.456 (-1.429) NoTE.-Log-likelihood at convergence = -772.45; X2(17) = 108.1, P = 2.75 X 10-11; p2 = .071; N = 918; fstatistic in parentheses. lives in a rural area. If we also make the assumption that our hypotheti- cal respondent has not visited the library in the past year,8 the results of fitting the model show that someone with these characteristics is most likely to support imposing user fees, second most likely to support raising taxes, and least likely to support cutting services. To be precise, the predicted probabilities for this hypothetical respondent are .593 to impose user fees, .349 to increase taxes, and .057 to cut services. The results for frequency of visits to the library are consistent with a self-interest interpretation. As the frequency of visits increases, peo- ple are less likely to favor either the imposition of user fees or a reduc- tion in services as compared to raising taxes. One point worth noting is that the two parameters are similar, indicating that increasing fre- quency of library use does not lead to more of a shift away from cutting services than it does to a shift away from fees. However, the coefficient for user fees is associated with a much smaller standard error than that for service cuts, and hence can be backed with more confidence. Level of education also affects preferences regarding funding of pub- lic libraries. Persons with an incomplete high school education are most likely to favor fees over both cuts and taxes. The orderly series of positive but decreasing parameter values under "Fees vs. Taxes" indicate that as educational achievement increases, the level of support 8. The frequency of visits to the library was treated as an interval-level variable for the analysis.
USER FEES 199 for user fees exceeds support for the other alternatives (relative to the support for fees over taxes expressed by those with the most education) but by lesser amounts. There is only one education category-those who are college edu- cated-for which cuts are differentiated from tax increases. This group appears strongly opposed to service cuts while the other groups are more indifferent between service cuts and tax increases. Interestingly, the group with advanced university or professional degrees does not oppose service cuts as much as do the college-educated. A possible self- interest explanation is that those with graduate education are more likely to have ready access to other libraries, such as academic libraries, and therefore do not consider public libraries to be as critical as do those with a bachelor's degree. If education differentiates attitudes toward user fees, then level of income does the same for service reduction. As with education, income is expressed as a series of categorical variables with the highest-income group acting as the reference category. And as with education, there is a clear progression in the parameter estimates as the level of income increases. Those with low incomes are most likely to favor service cuts over the other alternatives. Income cannot differentiate user fees from taxes, however, indicating perhaps that both are seen as alternatives that "cost money," an issue of some importance to lower-income people. The next variable appearing in the model is geographical. It relates to how living in an urban, suburban, or rural setting affects prefer- ences. "Rural"' is the reference category. The set of four negative pa- rameter estimates indicates that living in urban or suburban locations decreases the likelihood of supporting either user fees or service reduc- tions in relation to increased taxes. Two other observations are that opposition to fees or cuts is strongest among urban dwellers and, sec- ond, that among nonrural residents, opposition toward cuts seems stronger than the opposition toward fees. The former is a more compel- ling observation than the latter. These geographical results may well reflect a friction-of-distance ef- fect. Typically, rural residents will have the longest trip to any public library branch and therefore place less personal value on the services that are offered. In contrast, urban residents will typically have the best spatial proximity to libraries. Suburbanites are between these two ex- tremes. If these statements are true, then there is further evidence of self-interest effects in the data. Finally, we consider the performance of the other socioeconomic variables. While it is not a strong result, there is some evidence that males are more strongly opposed to service reductions than are fe-
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 4 CHAmAumIusTlCs ASSOCIATED wiTH EXTREME PROBABILITIES Example 1 Example 2 Example 3 Example 4 Probability: TAXES .805 .218 .281 .164 FEES .183 .726 .362 .547 REDUCE .012 .056 .357 .289 Variable: LIBFREQ 3 0 1 0 MALE 1 1 0 0 CHILD 0 0 1 1 XHIGHSC 0 1 0 1 HIGHSC 0 0 0 0 SPOST 0 0 1 0 COLLEGE 0 0 0 0 LOWINC 0 0 1 1 LOWMID 0 0 0 0 MID 0 1 0 0 HIGHMID 0 0 0 0 URBAN 1 0 0 0 SUBURBAN 0 0 0 0 NOTE.-Recall that for each of the variables except LIBFREQ one level of the variable is considered the reference category. The reference categories are not explicitly mentioned in this table, so when a column of numbers is all zeroes for a variable, it means that it is the reference category that is associated with the set of probabilities at the head of that column. males. Gender, however, has no impact on the choice between taxes and fees. Another slightly stronger result has people with children be- ing more likely to prefer service reductions to an increase in taxes. In some respects, this result is surprising, since people often value the services public libraries provide for their children [19]. Perhaps the present result indicates that for a given household income, people with children have less disposable income and are therefore more likely to be opposed to any measure that would add to their financial burden, other things being equal. In terms of fit, this model does significantly better than a null model that estimates only the two constants (X2[17] = 108.1, P = 3 X 10-'). There are no dominant variables in the analysis, and the measure of the strength of the fit, p2, is only .072. Views toward the three alterna- tives are not easily predicted on the basis of demographic variables.9 Nevertheless, we have seen some statistically significant choice tenden- cies in the data. Table 4 provides another indication of the performance of the 9. McFadden [30] has suggested that p2 = .2 would suggest a very good fitting model. There is no uniformity in interpretation of the R2 from regression and the p2 measure even though both are measured on the unit interval.
USER FEES 201 model. This table contains all the relevant data for observations associ- ated with extreme predicted probabilities for each of the alternatives. While the fit of the model is not excellent, the results in this table indicate that the model has considerable success in differentiating the behavior of people based on their characteristics. Example 1 details the characteristics of the person in the data who has the highest pre- dicted "tax" probability, example 2 relates to the maximum "fees" probability, and example 3 has the maximum "reduce services" proba- bility. Finally, example 4 has the minimum observed probability for "taxes" and receives further mention in the concluding section. It is clearly seen that a person who most favors tax increases (example 1; probability of .805) lives in an urban area, visits the library frequently, is more likely male, is highly educated, and has a high income. The maximum support for fees (example 2; probability of .726) is predicted to come from a rural, poorly educated male with a medium income who never visits the library. Note that the medium level of income is not inconsistent with the support of user fees as might have been expected. Finally, the maximum support for service reduction (example 3; proba- bility of only .357) is predicted to come from a rural, low-income fe- male with some postsecondary education who infrequently visits a li- brary. Note that the relatively high level of education is not inconsistent with the support of service cuts. Discussion and Conclusions The present analysis points up at least two instances of self-interest as a motivating factor for attitudes toward funding of American public libraries. More frequent library users were more likely to support taxes for libraries, as were city dwellers, for whom library services are closer. It conceivably could be argued that the effect of place of residence is actually indirect evidence of the impact of political oudlook on attitudes toward library funding, since cities tend to contain more liberal voters. There are two problems with such an interpretation, however. First, suburban residents tend to be at least as conservative as rural residents and so should have been at least as opposed to taxes. However, they fell in between the rural residents and the city dwellers in their support of taxes for public libraries, which is more consistent with a service convenience interpretation. Second, if there were a strong link be- tween political outlook and support of taxes, the effect should have shown up in the variable that measured political outlook directly, but it did not. Those with more education and higher incomes were more likely to
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY support taxes. Presumably, this situation is not simply because wealth- ier, more highly educated people tend to be more regular library users. If that were the only reason, the effects would have been eliminated by having library usage as a separate variable in the discrete choice model. The direct effects of education and income can nonetheless be seen as a form of self-interest if one makes the plausible assumption that wealthier, more highly educated people are more likely to have a higher option demand for public libraries. An "option demand" [31] is the willingness to pay to have a service available, even if one does not immediately use it. Along the same lines, the wealthier, more educated respondents may have wanted good library services for their children or grandchildren. Although the results of the discrete choice analysis tend to highlight the self-interest aspect of the data, it is important to keep in mind that self-interest by no means provides a complete explanation for attitudes toward library funding. As evidence, table 4 illustrates that the maxi- mum predicted probability for reduction of services is .357. Hence, even those individuals who personally rarely visit libraries and live far away from them have a low predicted level of support for service reduc- tion. Also, example 4 of table 4 indicates that the group that would be expected to most bitterly oppose taxes (poorly educated, low income, rural resident, no library visits) has a .164 likelihood of supporting tax increases. While low, this probability is not zero. Apparently, there is a level of social-mindedness that transcends ordinary socioeconomic factors and is inconsistent with absolute self-interest. It seems safe to say that the public perceives public libraries as a mix of public goods and private goods. Would it then make sense to support them with a mix of taxes and fees? It probably depends a lot on the nature of the fees. The respondents to the survey on which this study is based were not asked about specific kinds of fees. An obvious area for future research is to collect more data in which public attitudes toward different kinds of fees in public libraries are measured. One other source of funding for public libraries that has not been mentioned in this discussion is fund-raising. Although they constitute less than two percent of the funding of public libraries, private dona- tions are growing as a source of revenue [20]. Librarians who are con- templating increasing their fund-raising efforts might be encouraged by differences in attitudes toward public and private goods recently discovered by D. P. Green [32]. In a metanalysis of several different data sets, Green found that the price elasticity of private goods is con- siderably higher than the price elasticity of public goods. In other words, consumers are far more sensitive to how much private goods cost when making decisions about a purchase than they are about how
USER FEES 203 much public goods cost when making decisions about providing sup- port. His results suggest that those who are willing to support public institutions are willing to support them at an adequate level. Although Green's research did not specifically cover libraries, it seems likely that his findings apply to them. REFERENCES 1. National Commission on Libraries and Information Science. "The Role of Fees in Sup- porting Library and Information Services in Public and Academic Libraries." Collection Building 8 (1986): 3-17. 2. White, L. J. The Public Library in the 1980s: The Problems of Choice. Lexington, Mass.: Lexing- ton Books, 1983. 3. Estabrook, L., and Horak, C. "Public vs. Professional Opinion on Libraries: The Great Divide?" LibraryJournal 117 (1992): 52-55. 4. Giacoma, P. The Fee orFreeDecision: Legal, Economic, Political, and Ethical Perspectivesfor Public Libraries. New York: Neal-Schuman, 1989. 5. Gallup Organization. Book Reading and Library Usage: A Study of Habits and Perceptions. Princeton, N.J.: Gallup Organization, 1978. 6. Garrison, D. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920. New York: Free Press, 1979. 7. Blanchard,J. "Anatomy of Failure: Ontario Mechanics' Institutes, 1835-1895." Canadian Library Journal 38 (1981): 393-98. 8. Tyack, D. B. The One Best System: A History of Amenican Urban Education. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1974. 9. Shera, J. H. Foundations of the Public Library: The Origins of the Public Library Movement in Newv England, 1629-1855. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949. 10. Shmanske, S. Public Goods, Mixed Goods, and Monopolistic Competition. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1991. 11. Van House, N. A. Public Library User Fees: The Use and Finance of Public Libraries. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1983. 12. Cooper, M. D. "Charging Users for Library Service." Information Processing and Manage- ment 14 (1978): 419-27. 13. Coase, R. H. "The Lighthouse in Economics." Journal of Law and Economics 17 (1974): 357-76. 14. Benson, B. L. "Are Public Goods Really Common Pools? Considerations of the Evolution of Policing and Highways in England." Economic Inquiry 32 (1994): 249-71. 15. Stretton, H., and Orchard, L. Public Goods, PublicEntepriise, Public Choice: TheoreticalFounda- tions of the Contemporary Attack on Govenment. New York: St. Martin's, 1994. 16. Gonzalez, R. A.; Means, T. S.; and Mehay, S. L. "Empirical Tests of the Samuelsonian Publicness Parameter: Has the Right Hypothesis Been Tested?" Public Choice 77 (1993): 523-34. 17. Wyckoff, J. H. "The Non-Excludable Publicness of Primary and Secondary Public Educa- tion. " Journal of Public Economics 24 (1984): 331-51. 18. McClure, C. R.; Owen, A.; Zweizig, D. L.; Lynch, M. J.; and Van House, N. A. Planning and Role Setting for Public Libraries. Chicago: American Library Association, 1987. 19. D'Elia, G., and Rodger, E. J. "Public Opinion about the Roles of the Public Library in the Community: The Results of a Recent Gallup Poll." Public Libraries 33 (1994): 23-28.
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 20. St. Lifer, E.; Boehning, J. C.; and Mazmanian, A. "Public Libraries Face Fiscal Chal- lenges." Library Journal 121 (1996): 40-45. 21. Netzer, D. "Differences in Reliance on User Charges by American State and Local Gov- ernments. " Public Finance Quarterly 20 (1992): 499-51 1. 22. Hall, R B. "The Vote Is In: Undeniably Operational." Library Journal 120 (1995): 40- 45. 23. Beck, P. A.; Rainey, H. G.; and Traut, C. "Disadvantage, Disaffection, and Race as Diver- gent Bases for Citizen Policy Preferences." Journal of Politics 52 (1990): 71-93. 24. Beiton, J. E., and Daly, J. L. "The Paradox of Citizen Service Evaluations and Tax/Fee Preferences: The Case of Two Small Cities." American RevieP of Public Administration 22 (1992): 271-87. 25. Hasenfeld, Y., and J. A. Rafferty. "The Determinants of Public Attitudes toward the Wel- fare State." Social Forces 67 (1989): 1027-48. 26. Sanders, A. "Rationality, Self-Interest, and Public Attitudes on Public Spending." Social Science Quarterly 69 (1988): 311-24. 27. D'Elia, G. The Roles of the Public Library in Society: The Results of a National Survey: Final Report. Evanston, Ill.: Urban libraries Council, 1993. 28. Ben-Akiva, M., and Lerman, S. R. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Applications to Predict Travel Demand. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985. 29. Sone, A. "An Application of Discrete Choice Analysis to the Modeling of Public Library Use and Choice Behavior." Library and Information Science Research 10 (1988): 35-55. 30. McFadden, D. "Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice." In Frontiers in Econometrics, edited by P. Zaremba. New York: Academic Press, 1974. 31. McCain, R. "Information as Property Right and as a Public Good: Perspectives from the Economic Theory of Property Rights." Library Quarterly 58 (1988): 265-82. 32. Green, D. P. "The Price Elasticity of Mass Preferences." American Political Science Review 86 (1992): 128-48.