Introduction Medical consumers are at the nexus of the health-care system in the United States in the early twenty-first century. In line with the increased role patients and families have in health-care decision making, consumers participate in their own care, whether as outpatients, inpatients, lifestyle adherents, or family caregivers, as never before in the modern world. Yet, the contemporary consumer health information (CHI) movement in the United States actually began decades ago. Understanding its genesis and tracing its development, from 1900 through 2010, will help medical and public librarians, health policy professionals, health administrators, and other stakeholders improve information services for health consumers. A snapshot of the consumer health information movement is particularly apropos at this time. In December 2007 the U.S. economy officially was declared in recession. President Barack Obama, in responding to the economic crisis after his inauguration in January 2009, stated that health-care reform was the single most important feature of economic stability, and that, without it, the country’s efforts to right the economy at that time would fail. The provision of consumer health information is a necessary support mechanism for that portion of health-care reform invested in risk reduction, treatment compliance, and shared decision making. Reviewing the steps that have led U.S. consumers to their present central position in the reform debate can help us understand changes in health-care delivery as particulars of the various forms of legislation that are enacted take effect. The consumer health information movement is a social construct that relies heavily on the concept that “knowledge is power, and power is based on knowledge,” a concept derived from Francis Bacon’s observation that knowledge is power. From this perspective, knowledge provides the capacity for action that is associated with power. As Michel Foucault noted, “Far from preventing knowledge, power produces it” [1, p. 59]. In fact, the quest for power that permits self-determination has been a driving force behind the CHI movement. The knowledge/power equation has informed the modern CHI movement every step of the way and continues to grow in importance. As with other social constructs, the consumer health information movement derives from ongoing, complex human interactions that have occurred within certain social contexts. To understand its origin, one must be cognizant of the societal landscape that allowed the CHI movement to come to fruition and helped shape its very existence. Analysis of representative key components of that landscape provides a lens through which the origin of the movement can be examined. Scope Consumer health information [2] assists individuals with understanding any aspect of health and making health-related decisions. The knowledge gained empowers them and provides the capacity for action. Knowledge is a product of social, political, historical, and cultural processes and interactions. Social conditions present throughout the historical continuum along which the CHI movement has developed have shaped how we now create, store, and share health information. Today’s flood of CHI is the result of a complex interaction of historical events, sociocultural movements, political shifts, landmark legislation, judicial decisions, grassroots advocacy organizations, seminal books, and remarkable technological and scientific advances that comprise entire sectors of the cultural landscape. Knowledge/Power Perspective The U.S. consumer health information movement is an outgrowth of changes in Western consumerism ushered in by the Industrial Revolution and has been forged, in part, by the desire to control one’s own health and well being. One means by which an individual may gain power to help control her/his own health and well being is by seeking relevant knowledge. With the advent of mass consumption, various policies and practices were and continue to be put into place to educate and protect consumers of goods and services. In fact, there is perhaps no greater “safety net” than the one cast to safeguard individuals in this country where health and well being are concerned. And there is no subject that has generated more interest in promoting public education to support informed decision making. From a sociology of knowledge perspective, examining the development of the CHI movement requires analyzing social sources of knowledge, spurred by historical events, that were necessary to support its genesis. Sociopolitical Events and Movements The Industrial Revolution The Industrial Revolution, confined to England from 1760 to 1830, was embraced first in North America in the northeastern United States. While the textile and railway industries were well developed in the United States before the Civil War, the period from 1870 to 1913, sometimes called the Second Industrial Revolution, was particularly notable. As factories were built beyond New England, people began to migrate from rural life to burgeoning cities in search of employment. Moving from a largely rural society to an urban one brought significant changes to the American way of life. City life, by its very nature, heightened the probability of infectious disease outbreaks, criminal activity, and class segregation, all of which have an impact on the health of both individuals and societies. Together with these changes came explosive population growth, significant immigration from Europe, the development of major cities, urbanization, and a powerful labor movement, all factors that affected the health of the citizenry. The Labor Movement: Workplace Safety and Health Security The labor movement in the United States was part of a worldwide movement among workers to improve their lives. The dangers inherent in manufacturing, mining, and other industrial operations, coupled with a drive to increase profits, sometimes result in tragedy, even in contemporary times, though such events were far more common in the past. (However, in 2010, fourteen people per day lost their lives in work-related accidents in the United States [3]). Even child labor was not finally, officially ended in the United States until passage of the Fair Labor Standards Act in 1938, though several states and territories had effectively ended it much earlier [4]. Labor-management-government relations have resulted in countless changes over the years. Two in particular have had an effect on consumer health and information: employer-sponsored health insurance and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or OSHA. Alone among nearly all other nations, employers in the United States have for many years carried the burden of insuring most people in this country. Early in the 1930s, during the Great Depression, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt chose not to extend universal health coverage to U.S. citizens. Instead, private insurance began becoming widely available to cover the increasing costs of illness. Once the United States entered World War II, wages were effectively frozen as part of the war effort. However, benefits could be expanded, including the provision of health insurance to workers and their families. Various government decisions in 1945 and 1949 encouraged the expansion of employee-sponsored health insurance, and in 1954 the Internal Revenue Service ruled that health benefits were not taxable. Consequently, “the private sector in the United States fulfills essential social responsibilities assumed by governments in most other industrialized nations” [5, p. 83]. Decades on, as health-care costs have skyrocketed and employers have begun shifting more of the cost of this coverage to employees, many have also begun providing incentives for wellness, from subsidized gym memberships to consumer health information provided through many guises. Personal responsibility for maintaining health and making health-promoting lifestyle decisions has never before in history been so generally expected. The corollary is that never before has a society had as much knowledge about health and wellness as is now available. Workplace safety was enhanced in 1970 with the passage of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which purported to “assure safe and healthful working conditions for working men and women” [6]. Fights for workplace safety that were once waged within the labor movement are now enshrined in federal law and regulation. The Environmental Movement Launch of the contemporary environmental movement in the United States is often credited to publication of Rachel Carson’s 1962 book Silent Spring [7], although roots of the movement can be traced to earlier attempts that sought to expose the costs of environmental negligence and to encourage preservation of natural wonders. In Silent Spring, Carson provided a detailed account of the indiscriminate use of pesticides and their deleterious effect on the environment. Silent Spring produced a revolution in public opinion, helping to shape legislation that resulted in the creation of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration as well as the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. In the United States, the environmental movement is grounded in public health as well as public interest in conservation. The movement spans political, scientific, and social interests by focusing on ecology, health, and human rights where environmental issues are concerned. In recent years, the environmental movement increasingly has been concerned with countering global warming and creating solutions to support the sustainability of the planet by “going green.” The “extended shadow of Rachel Carson” [8] is visible to anyone who has read Silent Spring. The Women’s Movement: Template for Reform During the post–Industrial Revolution period in the United States, various groups began to organize around civil rights issues. By the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, women’s suffrage had become a point of contention. In response, women began to organize in an effort to effect change. The resulting women’s movement provides an example of how social organization influences ideas and, ultimately, may lead to a shift in the structure of authority. The women’s movement helped lay the groundwork for other civil rights movements, including those related to race, gender, sexual orientation, mental health, disability, and privacy, and it serves as a useful example of how these movements evolved. Other Civil Rights Movements: Integration, Informed Consent, Empowerment The first wave of the women’s movement ushered in other movements demanding change, opportunity, and increased participation in decision making. One example is the modern civil rights movement, a political movement originating in the 1950s that sought equality under the law and laid the foundation for its ongoing pursuit. In the United States, the civil rights movement was primarily concerned with the rights of African Americans. The movement focused on abolishing discrimination and restoring suffrage in southern states. As with the women’s movement, legislation was enacted to support equality and the protection of civil liberties. Organizations were formed to promote and foster ongoing support. Numerous literary works and media events were published examining economic, historical, personal, political, and social issues. In essence, social organization made generation and ordering of knowledge possible. The synergy and ultimate outcomes of the women’s movement and African American civil rights movement have served as catalysts for other groups seeking social equality as well as equality under the law, and not just where gender and race are concerned. Sexual revolution The beginning of the modern sexual revolution is often dated precisely as May 9, 1960, when the first approved oral contraceptive came on the market. Lasting into the 1970s, the sexual revolution was a sociopolitical movement that challenged social thought, institutional authority, and codes of behavior related to sexuality. It heralded a new culture where love was celebrated and sex was considered an ordinary part of life. An underlying theme behind the sexual revolution was the desire to control one’s own sexual being. The sexual revolution and its aftermath marched hand in hand with the advent of gay liberation, the repeal of miscegenation laws, and a redoubling of the efforts of the women’s movement. The period was also marked by a renewed interest in natural contraception, natural childbirth, and breast-feeding. The 1960s and 1970s yielded landmark legal decisions that continue to generate debate where politics of the body are concerned. In 1965 the U.S. Supreme Court struck down a previous ruling (Griswold v. Connecticut Supreme Court) that made the use of contraception by married couples illegal. In Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972), the Court established the right of unmarried people to possess contraception on the same basis as married couples. And in 1973 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled, in Roe v. Wade, that most U.S. laws outlawing or restricting abortion violated a woman’s constitutional right to privacy, thus overturning all state and federal laws not consistent with the Court’s findings. In some ways, the period heightened demarcation concerning politics of the body versus the body politic, but in others, it began to level the playing field. Self-help movement Related to the idea of control over one’s body and mind, the contemporary self-help movement, which dates from the early 1970s, is focused on the consumer as survivor and is characterized by such traits as choice, empowerment, independence, and responsibility. Self-help, or self-improvement, is based on self-reliance and the application of publicly available information or participation in support groups consisting of individuals in similar situations. Self-help is grounded in the philosophy that suggests that individuals who take charge of their lives may improve their situations. Research on human subjects While health-care consumers were learning more about healthy lifestyles and demanding more of a voice in their medical care, biomedical science was moving at a dizzying rate. As social awareness grew, particularly as it related to the advancement of science and the use of human subjects, so did the desire to protect humankind. In 1979 the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare released its report “Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research” [9]. These guidelines were developed in part as a response to the Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male [10]. The study became controversial because investigators failed to treat patients once penicillin was found to be an effective cure for syphilis in the 1940s. The forty-year Tuskegee study—from 1932 to 1972—violated ethical principles related to conducting research, specifically those concerning informed consent and patient safety. Patient empowerment In part because of the furor over the Tuskegee matter, by the mid-1970s there was a growing demand for patient empowerment, a movement that focused on the concept of patient as partner or participant. Patients sought to take an active role in managing their health and well being. Parallel to development of the patient empowerment movement, women began forming support groups for individuals diagnosed with breast cancer. These grassroots efforts related to breast cancer formed the beginning of a broader advocacy effort in which women began trying to raise awareness of cancer, garner support, and promote the search for a cure. In 1978 Y-Me, now known as the Breast Cancer Network of Strength, was founded to provide peer support and companionship to women. Four years later Susan G. Komen for the Cure was founded, and the Race for the Cure, one of the best-known U.S. fund-raisers for treatment of a disease, was inaugurated. These models have been adopted by individuals with other types of cancers as well as for other diseases. One of the most visible groups to have adopted this patient advocacy model consists of individuals who have been affected by HIV/AIDS. Beginning with the Gay Men’s Health Crisis in 1981 [11], AIDS service organizations began to be formed throughout the United States. In addition to providing social service support, primary health care, and information produced in lay language, many of these organizations fulfilled lobbying functions designed not only to put a face on the disease but to influence federal, state, county, and city resource allocation. They also sought to restructure the traditional clinical research model to allow for the inclusion of community-based initiatives. Institutional authority was challenged to serve societal needs. The greatest challenge to institutional authority where health is concerned began in 1987, when demonstrators associated with ACT UP, the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, began demanding more clinical trials and recognition of the devastating effect of the human immunodeficiency virus on families and communities. Using the tactics of civil disobedience, angry gay men and their supporters stopped trading on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, snarled commuting traffic in urban areas across the country, and lay in coffins on the lawns of the National Institutes of Health. ACT UP brought lasting change to the drug approval process in the United States and drew attention to the harmful effects of discrimination. Every step taken toward patient empowerment, self-help, and formation of disease-based consumer organizations has supported the acquisition of knowledge by participants, knowledge that they have transformed into power. Similarly, the acquisition and creation of new forms of knowledge have yielded venues in which that power can be applied. The various civil rights movements, judicial decisions, sexual revolution, and protection of human subjects’ initiatives have altered both the social and health-care landscapes. The next step in each instance was legislation to encode the social changes demanded by the new mores and cultural norms. Key Legislation and Judicial Decisions Much of the legislation enacted during the early 1900s was drafted in response to burgeoning consumer movements and growing public awareness of unsafe or fraudulent health practices. (See table 1 for a summary of key legislation enacted between 1900 and 1969.) Significant advances were made in regulating the food and drug industry. In 1906 President Theodore Roosevelt signed into law the Federal Food and Drugs Act of 1906, which ushered in the modern era of the Food and Drug Administration [12]. The 1906 Act also served as parent legislation from which other acts stemmed, such as the Federal Meat Inspection Act. Table 1.  Key Legislation and Judicial Decisions, 1900–1969 Year Legislation or Case Outcome 1906 Federal Food and Drugs Act FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration), other similar legislation 1919 Eighteenth Amendment Prohibition (1919–33) 1933 Twenty-first Amendment Repeal of Prohibition 1935 Social Security Act Medicare added, 1965; federally qualified health centers added, 1991 1963 Equal Pay Act Gender parity for wages for same work 1964 Civil Rights Act Forbade discrimination on the basis of sex or race in hiring, promoting, and firing 1965 Griswold v. Connecticut struck down Legalized use of contraception by married couples 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act, Higher Education Act (HEA) Mandated and provided funding for education of disadvantaged children; HEA provided support for students pursuing postsecondary education 1967 Executive Order 11375 Extended affirmative action rights to women 1967 Loving v. Virginia Removed racially based restrictions on marriage 1968 Bilingual Education Act Provided funding for schools with large numbers of non-English-speaking students to study approaches to bilingual education 1919–38: Prohibition and the New Deal Beginning in 1933, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt initiated the New Deal, a series of economic planning, recovery, and stimulus programs designed to lift the country out of the Great Depression. The general premise was that government intervention was necessary to stimulate the economy and move the country toward recovery. Initial New Deal legislation provided short-term relief, whereas a second New Deal evolved into broader support, including creation of the Social Security Act. Signed into law in 1935, the Social Security Act has been amended significantly since its inception, including the addition of Medicare in 1965 and, in 1991, the advent of federally qualified health centers. 1960s: Civil Rights and Education A logical progression toward individuals exercising more control over their personal lives was the legalization of marriage between persons of different races. In 1967 the United States Supreme Court, in a 9–0 decision in the Loving v. Virginia case, declared the state of Virginia’s Racial Integrity Act of 1924 to be unconstitutional. This landmark decision rendered illegal all other racially based legal restrictions on marriage in the United States. Women scored several legal and judicial victories during the 1960s. An amendment to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, the Equal Pay Act of 1963 began the long effort to obtain parity between wages paid to men and women. No longer, for example, could male schoolteachers receive higher pay than women performing exactly the same job. In 1967 Executive Order 11375 extended affirmative action rights to women. Much of the legislation enacted in the 1960s reflected the ongoing desire for social equality, including the need for education reform, which helped provide a face for populations that previously had been almost invisible. Under President Lyndon Johnson, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, Higher Education Act of 1965, and Bilingual Education Act of 1968 were signed into law. Each of these acts was designed to bolster public education and enhance access to educational opportunities without regard to race, ethnicity, primary language, or other differences. 1970s: Decade of Empowerment Progress related to education reform continued into the 1970s, with President Gerald Ford signing into law the Education for All Handicapped Children Act in 1975. The 1975 law was enacted in an effort to provide appropriate and equitable education for children with disabilities that emulated education provided to nondisabled children. In the quarter-century following the enactment of these laws, the rights of physically and mentally disabled people to be mobile via public transportation, to be served in public places, to have access to public restrooms, and to be educated in the least restrictive environment were guaranteed and came to be expected. As individuals with disabilities have become more visible, they have acquired power that they were formerly denied, and society generally has become more tolerant of benign individual differences. All of these changes ultimately affected the provision of health-care services in neighborhoods and communities across the United States, including those where English is a second language, if it is spoken at all. In many such areas today clinics operate almost entirely in a language other than English, and consumer health information on major topics is available in many languages. (See table 2 for a summary of key legislation enacted between 1970 and 1979.) Table 2.  Key Legislation and Judicial Decisions, 1970–79 Year Legislation or Case Outcome 1970 National Environmental Policy Act Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) created 1970 Occupational Safety and Health Act OSHA created 1970 Public Health Services Act Title X provided contraceptive and preventive health services to low-income women 1971 National Cancer Act Launched “War on Cancer” 1972 Eisenstadt v. Baird Legalized possession of contraceptive devices by single people 1972 Education amendments Title IX assured participation in educational activities regardless of gender 1973 National Research Act Established institutional review boards (IRBs) 1974 Women’s Educational Equity Act Promoted educational equality for all women, including the disabled 1974 Equal Credit Opportunity Act Forbade credit discrimination on the basis of race, marital status, national origin, age, or dependence on public assistance 1975 Education for All Handicapped Children Act Required least restrictive educational environment for identified children aged 3–21 years old 1976 National Consumer Health Information and Health Promotion Act Amendment to Public Health Service Act required development of national goals for preventive health services and health information 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act Amendment to Civil Rights Act forbade workplace discrimination on the basis of pregnancy Women continued to move toward greater equality of treatment and opportunity in all realms in the 1970s. Title X of the Public Health Services Act of 1970 assured access to contraceptive and preventive health services regardless of ability to pay. Title IX of the 1972 Education Amendments opened the door to women’s participation in sports at every level of education. Congress enacted the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978, forbidding employers to treat pregnant women differently from other members of the workforce based solely on their pregnancy. President Richard M. Nixon signed significant health-care legislation, the effects of which are ongoing. On New Year’s Day, 1970, he signed into law the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which created the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Later that year, President Nixon signed into law the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, which created the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). In his State of the Union address in 1971, President Nixon called for funding to fight the scourge of cancer. He signed the National Cancer Act into law in December 1971. This legislation gave the National Cancer Institute unique budgetary authority within the National Institutes of Health. In an effort to safeguard U.S. citizens further, President Nixon signed the National Research Act into law in 1974. The National Research Act created the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research to regulate human experimentation. The act also required that all research funded by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare receive institutional review board (IRB) approval. In addition, the National Consumer Health Information Act of 1976, signed into law by President Gerald Ford, advocated for an increase in an individual’s capacity and incentive to take major responsibility for her/his own health, thereby laying a foundation for the promotion of consumer health education. As the knowledge/power equation increasingly came into play, passive acceptance of health and treatment decisions passed away from the social landscape of the United States. 1980–2010: Knowledge/Power Transform the Landscape In 1985 the Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act was approved by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. The law allows for individuals to adopt a living will that specifies their preference to forgo life support should that need arise. Similarly, the Patient Self-Determination Act of 1990 requires most health-care facilities receiving federal funds to notify adult individuals, at the time of inpatient admission or enrollment, of their rights under applicable state law to formulate advance directives such as living wills or durable powers of attorney for health care. The Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) is a logical outgrowth of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975. With education and expectations, people with disabilities, especially physical ones, demanded access to public transit, public places, equal employment opportunities, and other means of full integration into society. (See table 3 for a summary of key legislation enacted between 1980 and 2010.) Table 3.  Key Legislation and Judicial Decisions, 1980–2010 Year Legislation or Case Outcome 1980 Diamond v. Chakrabarty Allowed patenting of genetically modified bacteria 1985 Uniform Rights of the Terminally Ill Act Led to advance directives 1990 Patient Self-Determination Act Inpatients must be notified upon admission or registration of their right to an advance directive 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act Assured access to public buildings and transportation for disabled individuals 1991 High-Performance Computing Act National Information Infrastructure, Mosaic 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act Job security for up to twelve weeks per year for family or medical reasons 1998 Master settlement with tobacco companies Restrictions on advertising and marketing tobacco products 2002 HCAHPS (Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems) Consumer information regarding certain quality standards for hospitals and other facilities 2005 Deficit Reduction Act Requires acute-care hospitals to participate in HCAPHS to receive full reimbursement of some costs 2008 Wellstone-Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act Placed limits on denial or reduction of coverage for mental health or substance abuse treatment 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Biggest changes in the delivery of health care since the implementation of Medicare The information highway One of the most significant pieces of legislation affecting the provision of education and the delivery of health-care information was the High-Performance Computing Act (HPCA) of 1991. As a result of advances achieved relative to the 1991 act, the foundations have been laid for expanded health information systems useful to both health professionals and consumers. Ultimately, widespread access to the Internet and the World Wide Web transformed health-care practice as well as consumer expectation. According to a Pew Internet and American Life Project, “The Social Life of Health Information,” in as early as December 2002, 80 percent of adult Internet users reported having looked for health or medical information. Moreover, researchers reported that the biggest change in health searches over time (2002–8), from 36 percent to 52 percent, was for fitness searches, suggesting that Internet users were at least attempting to develop a modicum of control, or power, over their health behaviors [13]. Family and medical leave act In continuing to protect individual rights where health, family, and work are concerned, President Bill Clinton signed into law the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993. The FMLA grants an eligible employee up to twelve workweeks of unpaid leave during any twelve-month period for specific individual or family health reasons. Master settlement agreement with big tobacco Many serious health conditions are the result of exposure to tobacco. Accepted for years as a rite of passage to adulthood and a sign of sophistication, smoking is now banned in most workplaces and other public areas throughout most of the United States. After decades of conducting research and litigation related to negative health outcomes associated with smoking, the attorneys general from forty-six states signed an agreement with the four largest U.S. tobacco companies in 1998. This document provides for annual payments to the states as well as voluntary restrictions on the advertising and marketing of tobacco products in an effort to protect individuals from the harmful effects of tobacco use. The road to health-care reform Beginning in 2002, the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS)—also known as the CAHPS Hospital Survey—provides a standardized mechanism for measuring patients’ perspectives on hospital care. HCAHPS recognized the power that individual consumers wield in the health-care marketplace. Prior to HCAHPS, there was no nationally recognized tool for gathering or reporting patients’ perceptions of care that would allow for comparison across hospitals. With the enactment of the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, acute-care hospitals must participate in HCAHPS in order to receive the full amount of their Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) annual payment update. Some states have also taken a lead in health-care legislation and have initiated reforms within their borders that may someday serve as models for a national system. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, as of mid-2009, only Maine, Massachusetts, and Vermont have enacted universal health care for their citizens. Fourteen other states, from Connecticut to California, are at some point in the process of legislating care to all citizens of their states [14].3 On March 23, 2010, President Barack Obama signed into law the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, H.R. 3590, which officially became Public Law No. 111-148 with his signature. Presidents from Theodore Roosevelt forward encouraged or advocated for some aspect of health-care reform, yet the concept of universal coverage has always been contentious in the United States. Many provisions of the 2010 act did not take effect immediately, and all or portions of it may be challenged in court, but the bill’s passage was historic. The Obama Administration also issued rules in January 2010 that implemented the Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008. President John F. Kennedy first voiced the need for legislation in this area, and Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, and First Lady Rosalynn Carter all advocated in favor of the concept. The law requires “that benefits coverage for mental health and substance use benefits must be at least equal to that coverage provided for physical health benefits. In other words, all of the financial requirements and treatment limitations applied to mental health and substance use benefits may be no more restrictive than for physical health benefits” [15].4 How these two pieces of landmark legislation will alter the shape of health care in the United States will become evident only over the first one or two decades of implementation. Unquestionable, however, is the continued and expanded need for health consumers to have the information and knowledge they need to cope with the changes wrought by these laws in the U.S. health system and what the changes mean to them. Genetic information: Who owns it? What it means to consumers A United States District Court decision that may reach the Supreme Court and dramatically affects scientific advancement was handed down in March 2010. The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit, Association for Molecular Pathology, et al. v. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, et al., on the grounds that human genes are “products of nature” and can therefore not be patented like an invention. At the time of the decision, approximately one-fifth of the human genome was patented, a circumstance allowable because of a 1980 decision, Diamond v. Chakrabarty. Prior to this case, life-forms were considered part of nature and consequently not patentable. However, this 5–4 Supreme Court decision ruled that genetically modified bacteria were not inherently a part of nature and could therefore be protected by patent. Subsequently, patents were issued on whole genes whose function was known and even on fragments of DNA [16]. While the outcome of this controversy is presently unknown, the importance of a consumer having the information and knowledge that will help him or her make wise decisions regarding genetic testing and personalized medical treatments remains paramount. Decoding of the human genome provides an example of how knowledge generation creates new venues in which power may be applied, particularly where politics of the body are concerned. Key Organizations Social organizations have long been known to possess power of their own. One way that consumers have made their voices heard since 1900 is through advocacy organizations. While these associations vary in their effectiveness and resources, some rival even government funding for research and provide excellent public education, resources, and support for patients and families affected by a given disease or condition. Of the many organizations that provide support, education, advocacy, and research funding, seven in particular have instant name recognition and respected agendas. They are the American Cancer Society, the American Heart Association, the American Diabetes Association, the American Lung Association, the March of Dimes, Planned Parenthood, and Alcoholics Anonymous. Nearly all of these organizations support professionals and research, but their primary purpose is to advocate for and provide information and support to individuals affected by their respective causes. All sponsor exhaustive Web sites and regional chapters that bring the organization’s resources directly into communities. They also fund significant research into the diseases and conditions that they target. Two of these organizations—the March of Dimes and the American Cancer Society—have developed programs that partner with hospitals to provide professional support services for parents in neonatal intensive care units and for patients in institutions that treat cancer. The support and access to resources provided through these programs is invaluable to the affected individuals and their families. These organizations and others like them have served for decades as catalysts for other support networks. (See table 4 for a summary of influential health organizations.) Table 4.  Influential Health Organizations Name of Organization Today Year Founded Type of Service Provided Ties to Consumer Health Information Alcoholics Anonymous 1939 Individual and group support Support groups American Cancer Society 1913 Research, information, advocacy, community programs and services Web site, brochures, patient navigation services, hotlines, local affiliates American Diabetes Association 1940 Research, information, advocacy, community programs and services Web site, brochures, hotlines, local affiliates American Heart Association 1924 Research, information, advocacy, community programs and services Web site, brochures, hotlines, local affiliates American Lung Association 1904 Research, information, advocacy, community programs and services Web site, brochures, local affiliates March of Dimes 1938 Research, information, advocacy, community programs and services Web site, brochures, patient navigation services, local affiliates Planned Parenthood 1916 Health care, education, advocacy, global network Web site, brochures, clinics, local affiliates, global network Influential Books Before the 1990–2010 explosion of published memoirs, a handful of books paved the way for public interest and concern in specific health areas. While the short list included here could be endlessly debated, each of these works represented sociocultural events or interests of their time. Most can even be considered iconic; they continue to exert influence and, in some cases, controversy. All of them reflected societal concerns or historical happenings at the time of their publication or spawned public awareness of issues. Books are a form of advocacy that has fostered the growth of the CHI movement. The knowledge that can be gleaned from their pages empowers individuals and lets them know that they are not alone in confronting a health issue. Books provide perspective for consumers and can help them make more informed choices about their own lives. (See table 5 for a summary of books of historical significance in the consumer movement.) Table 5.  Books of Historical Significance in the Consumer Movement Year Title and Author Topic 1906 The Jungle by Upton Sinclair Food safety 1946 The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care by Dr. Benjamin Spock Parenting 1962 Silent Spring by Rachel Carson Environmental awareness 1965 Unsafe at Any Speed by Ralph Nader Consumer safety 1968 The Double Helix by James D. Watson How scientists work 1969 I’m OK, You’re OK: A Practical Guide to Transactional Analysis by Thomas Harris Self-help movement 1973 Our Bodies, Ourselves by Boston Women’s Health Book Collective Women’s movement, women’s health 1976 First, You Cry by Betty Rollin Breast cancer 1987 And the Band Played On by Randy Shilts 1991 Final Exit by Derek Humphry Rights of the dying 1997 The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down by Anne Fadiman Transcultural awareness in medicine Technology Changes Technological advances have been a driving force behind contemporary reform in education and health care. With the advent of the Internet and World Wide Web, the potential for ubiquitous access to information became a reality. In addition, enhanced computing capabilities have allowed for the effective storage and manipulation of mass quantities of data that previously were not possible. A good example of such data management is the Human Genome Project. The contemporary biology revolution is considered to have begun with the massive sequencing of the human genome. Completed in 2003, the U.S. Human Genome Project was a thirteen-year effort coordinated by the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health. Private efforts also contributed to completion of the map of the human genome [17]. One beneficiary of the U.S. Human Genome Project is the field of molecular medicine. Technology and resources promoted by the Human Genome Project have direct bearing on biomedical research and have the potential to revolutionize the wider spectrum of biological research and clinical medicine. Increasingly detailed genome maps have aided researchers seeking genes associated with dozens of genetic conditions. A new era of molecular medicine promises to focus more on the fundamental causes of disease rather than the treatment of symptoms. Called personalized medicine, its “ overarching goal … is to optimize medical care and outcomes for each individual, to include treatments, medication types and dosages, and/or prevention strategies [that] may differ from person to person—resulting in an unprecedented customization of patient care” [18]. While advances in technology have helped fuel education and health-care reform, they have also brought about basic paradigmatic shifts where scientific communication is concerned. In what was once a traditional top-down model where researchers produced information that was applied by health-care providers (with little or no input from health-care consumers), modern health care is witnessing a confluence of roles. Health-care consumers are now active users and producers of information [19]. Researchers and health-care providers are both information producers and consumers. One need only look at the goals of the Clinical and Translational Science Awards coordinated by the U.S. National Center for Research Resources to see the blurring of the lines where research and communication are concerned [20]. New communication models, methods, and channels are changing relative to technological advances. Technology has become more a way of life with each successive generation. With advanced technologies and the advent of the Internet and World Wide Web, communication has increasingly focused on the end user at the point of need. Desktops have given way to laptops; laptops to notebooks and net books, hand-held devices, and sophisticated mobile phones. “Snail mail” gave way to e-mail, which is now giving way to texting, tweeting, blogging, and other social means of electronic interaction. Static Internet resources are being replaced with Web 2.0 and even 3.0 technologies, and social networking sites have become commonplace. Information producers have taken advantage of increasing mobility, utility, and ease of access, and information consumers have begun to expect this ubiquitous access and become more comfortable with it. As Susannah Fox remarked during a National Public Radio interview with Joseph Shapiro, “The Internet now is not just information. There is a social life of information online. And people are using all these tools to connect with friends and family, to connect with health professionals. And people are accessing a much deeper level of information now than they were five years ago” [21]. This “social life of information” is hastening a new era of what Shapiro calls “participatory medicine.” Library Contributions and Implications Public libraries historically have provided most CHI resources and services in the United States and are often the first place many people turn when seeking health information. While barriers exist to providing CHI resources and services in the public library setting, there are various success stories. Two noted examples include CHIPS (Consumer Health Information Program and Services) in Los Angeles, California, and the Health Information Center at Wheaton Library in Wheaton, Maryland. Established in 1976, CHIPS is sponsored by the County of Los Angeles Public Library and the Los Angeles County Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Library [22]. It was originally funded by a Library Services and Construction Act Title I to serve health-care consumers, public library patrons, and hospital patients. The program is designed to provide current, accurate medical information and materials upon request. Established in 1989, Wheaton Library’s Health Information Center provides the public with access to reliable and up-to-date health information, education, and materials. It was originally funded by a federal grant through the Maryland State Department of Education. Both of these innovative programs have served as models for those working in the consumer health information arena. Consumer Health Libraries In addition to public libraries, CHI services have been developed in a variety of settings. One of the most successful such services was begun in 1981 in San Francisco, California, at the California Pacific Medical Center. The Planetree Health Resource Center is a nonprofit consumer health information organization that was founded on the philosophy that people should have access to information and educational resources to empower them to make better informed health-care decisions. The Planetree model combines aspects of a public library setting with the specialized collection of a medical library [23]. Today, Planetree Health Resource Centers have proliferated throughout the United States. In addition, the Planetree prototype has been duplicated in a wide variety of settings, including hospitals, outpatient clinics, social service organizations, and stand-alone storefront operations like the Stanford Health Library, a model for disseminated services. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health The U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) has been at the forefront of supporting consumer health information initiatives, both directly through NLM and through the National Network of Libraries of Medicine (NN/LM). In 1994 NLM began funding AIDS Community Information Outreach Projects. The purpose of the AIDS Community Information Project is to design local programs to improve HIV/AIDS health information access for patients and the affected community as well as their caregivers and the general public. In the mid 1990s, NLM’s Toxicology Information Program (TIP) evolved into the Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program (TEHIP), which maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health Web site that includes access to resources produced by TEHIP and by other government agencies and organizations. The Web site includes both scientific and consumer-oriented resources. In 1997 the National Library of Medicine initiated the Tribal Connections Project. The goal of the program was to intensify outreach efforts targeting Native Americans by establishing or strengthening access to Internet-based resources. Initially, the project focused on tribes or villages located in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. In 1998 the National Library of Medicine released MedlinePlus, NLM’s Web site for consumer health information. MedlinePlus offers authoritative, up-to-date health information without advertising, all free of charge. In addition to the National Library of Medicine, other institutes located at the National Institutes of Health have contributed to the provision of consumer health information. For example, PDQ, or Physician Data Query, is an online database developed and maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). PDQ went online in 1982, through the National Library of Medicine’s Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System (MEDLARS), as “the first publicly available, disease-specific, electronic information resource” [24]. It was designed for physicians. That vision grew throughout the 1980s and 1990s to become a resource for the most current and accurate cancer information available to both health professionals and the general public, with the World Wide Web version becoming available in 1995. PDQ contains peer-reviewed summaries on cancer treatment, screening, prevention, genetics, and supportive care; a registry of cancer clinical trials from around the world; and directories of physicians, professionals who provide genetics services, and organizations that provide cancer care [25]. All institutes and most centers within the NIH now provide comprehensive information for the consumer on their Web sites, but NCI led the way, owing to their existing system for physicians, PDQ, and the Patient Information Files, or PIF, which grew from these beginning in 1989.5 Discussion The CHI movement is the result of a historical continuum—one marked by the confluence of various events, movements, laws, policies, and shifting ideologies—that persists today. One underlying theme evident throughout the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries that has direct bearing on the ongoing development of the CHI movement is the push toward freedom of choice and action. The knowledge/power relationship undergirding the movement is a dynamic social process. Given its very nature, advancing the CHI movement has been dependent on social change. The consumer health information movement most likely would not have come to fruition if it were not for education reform, health-care reform, and advances made toward individual rights in all contexts. Additionally, progress related to the provision of consumer health information would not have been possible without recent technological breakthroughs. The United States has witnessed a migration from the position of viewing access to health information as a privilege granted to, and guarded by, the health-care establishment to one that is now considered an individual right that should be guaranteed for all, irrespective of institutional authority. Helping to lay the foundation for this shift in perspective, legislation was enacted throughout the 1960s and 1970s that promoted and ensured the concept of “education for all.” The synergy between education reform and health-care reform, combined with other “change movements” dating from about 1950 forward, is part of what allowed for the development of the CHI movement. Indeed, without the changes that occurred in schools, communities, technology, and health care, the CHI movement would likely not exist at all. Institutional authority was challenged repeatedly in order to effect ongoing change in intellectual culture. Each of these changes, which moved authority away from the people who had been power brokers and put it into the hands of consumers, resulted in the world of 2010, where the consumer often determines outcomes in a multitude of arenas. Because of the power shift described above, education reform and health-care reform are intimately connected. Both were given great impetus by the World Wide Web, since the provision of just-in-time resources and networking with other computer users empowered consumers as never before. Education reform and health-care reform continue to operate in tandem. As people become more educated, they become more inquisitive. Similarly, individuals who attain higher levels of education are more likely to assert greater control over their own lives and question the status quo. Focusing on the individual and promoting equal education has contributed to the belief that health-care consumers have the right to be informed and educated where their health and well being are concerned. The impact of the knowledge/power relationship driving this concept manifests itself in the various “patients’ bills of rights” that began emerging in the latter part of the twentieth century and sought to guarantee a patient’s right to information. This perception regarding the right to be empowered (and to overcome the struggle between the individual and the establishment) has been fed from other sources as well. For example, Prohibition made illegal the sale, purchase, or consumption of alcoholic beverages. But rather than having its desired effect, the contempt for Prohibition helped promote the existence of back-alley speakeasies frequented by flappers—modern era young women who celebrated individual liberties and flaunted their disdain for what were perceived as acceptable social mores of the times—and the young men of that generation who were also glad to shed some of the strictures of Victorian and Edwardian times. Similarly, the modern sexual revolution epitomized the debate over politics of the body versus the body politic by focusing on individual rights and relationships. Women delivered a powerful message to society, demanding control of their own bodies. Less restrictive social mores—from flappers to hippies—became accepted over time. Since the latter decades of the twentieth century, protected premarital sex between consenting adults has been part of the normal social landscape, with many couples marrying only after having a child or children or never marrying at all. And the ongoing self-help movement holds as a central tenet the concept of the individual taking charge of her/his own life. The movement toward more relaxed social norms, increased focus on the individual, and greater inclination to question the rights and role of the establishment gathered steam from the early 1900s forward, with technological advances supporting these ideological shifts. Technology has become more ingrained with each generation, contributing to the expectation of ubiquitous access to information. Organizations have played an important role in the move toward active consumer participation in health care, providing a focus for advocacy, support, fund-raising, and patient and consumer education. Celebrities have established foundations that raise millions of dollars for research and lend a voice to patients and families who would otherwise not have an advocate. Neighborhoods and communities sometimes band together to help raise money for a child to have an organ transplant or receive treatment for cancer or some other disease. People who find that they have a rare “orphan” disease form international networks to spur research and build awareness. Whether the organization is as large as the ones mentioned previously or consists of a local community or a handful of individuals across the globe who have some rare malady, banding together for advocacy, awareness, support, and funding is a common reaction to illness in oneself or loved ones. The growth of health organizations of all sizes and purposes complements the growing support for taking charge of one’s own health and well being. This trend has developed in parallel with the shift toward preventive medicine, which requires individuals to be health literate and have access to health information. For most, access to health care is now perceived as an individual’s right or something to which consumers are entitled—whether it be supported by direct pay, private insurance, public insurance, or some combination thereof. In fact, patients today often participate as partners on the health-care team. And the more patients are integrated into the health-care process, thereby challenging the former structure of authority, the greater the demand for a health-literate population with access to appropriate information resources. Given the knowledge/power equation, perception that everything is available via the Internet, and the increasing comfort people feel with technology, libraries and librarians risk becoming redundant where the provision of CHI is concerned. Historically, individuals have demonstrated their willingness to circumvent the establishment in the realms of health and well being. While some users are adept at finding and filtering often complicated health information, this is not true for all of them; a digital divide certainly exists. Libraries must take action to remain social equalizers where the provision of CHI is concerned and to maintain relevance in this arena. Through aggressive marketing campaigns, active promotion of librarians as authoritative information resources, and the establishment of nurturing environments, libraries can continue to be the destination of choice for many health-care consumers when they need information for health decision making. Conclusion The consumer health information movement is a dynamic social construct that has developed over time. It is the result of various ideological shifts that have resulted, directly and indirectly, from challenges to institutional authority. Moreover, the CHI movement is a product of the knowledge/power equation in which knowledge provides the capacity for action that is associated with power. The societal changes chronicled since 1900 demonstrate the human quest for power that supports self-determination. Ongoing progress in the delivery of health care is dependent in part on consumers having access to timely, relevant, understandable health information. With this paradigmatic shift whereby the practice of medicine is viewed less from a paternalistic perspective and more from a participatory position, shared knowledge becomes increasingly important at all levels. The growing emphasis on disease prevention, risk reduction, and shared decision making requires an informed citizenry. Public libraries, hospital libraries, academic medical center libraries, and some special libraries are all involved in the provision of CHI resources and services. As purveyors of information, libraries continue to bear responsibility where health information access for the public is concerned. However, the degree to which this remains true in the future is yet to be determined. Government entities and commercial ventures are increasingly making more health information content accessible via the Web. Costs associated with providing CHI resources and services, along with all the other financial realities facing libraries, continue to be an issue. Yet, the need has never been greater. The advent of personalized medicine has the potential to alter the landscape of the CHI movement by significantly increasing individuals’ needs to understand their own health in light of their genetic makeup. In all likelihood, these needs will only serve to heighten the quest for power that permits self-determination. And the knowledge/power relationship will continue to be a driving force in the CHI movement. In fact, the consumer health information movement will continue evolving relative to advances in the provision of health care, technological breakthroughs, further discoveries in molecular medicine and human genetics, and other wonders as yet unimagined.