Library and Information Professional Education for the Learning Society: A Model Curriculum ROBERT J. GRÒ VER Library and information science education continues to be an important issue within the library and information professions. The library's role in modern society is analyzed and implications for library and information science education are stated. Drawing upon the recommendations of key professionals a program is delineated. Undergraduate preparation for librarianship is discussed, and the instructional objec- tives for required professional courses are articulated. Elective courses are suggested as well. LIBRARY and information science education continues to be a vital issue in the library profession. The intensity of concern for profes- sional education is reflected in the profession's response to the govern- ment report on education, A Nation at Risk. In this response, Alliance for Excellence, the following recommendation is made: We recommend that library and information science educators reform and refine the recruitment, preparation, and continuing education of librarians and information scien- tists. Further, we recommend that the entire library community hold higher education responsible for providing high-quality education to equip professionals with special competencies to work effectively in libraries and information centers in the Learning Society.1 What is this "high-quality education" which should provide pro- fessionals the "special competencies" they need? What are these com- Grover is Dean, School of Library and Information Management, Emporia State Univer- sity, Emporia, KS 66801. Mss. received 1185; accepted 7/85. 33
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science petencies, and what is the role of libraries and information centers in the "Learning Society"? While library and information science education has been addressed in the professional literature, the content of an edu- cational program has been discussed only in the most general terms. Recent articles by Derr,2 Morehead,* White, 45 Battin,6 and Koenig7 addressed the importance of theory and the relative merit of skills in the preparation of librarians. Also, King Research, Inc., has studied the competencies of librarians in a variety of settings - school, public, academic, and special libraries.8 However, a study of current competencies and practices may not provide the framework for educating future li- brarians and other information professionals. These questions remain: What should be the content of library and information science education? What theory should be taught, and how much "practice" or skills should be part of a graduate program for the preparation of library and information professionals? How much special- ization should be encouraged? This concern for content of professional education extends to infor- mation professionals in nonlibrary positions. A recent conference at Emporia State University assembled practitioners and educators from information systems, information resource management, archives man- agement, records management, and library and information science.9 Papers presented and ensuing discussions indicated a widespread con- cern for the content of education for information professionals; the debate on the core knowledge essential for professional education is not restricted to the library educators. Therefore, in this paper, libraries is used in the broadest context to include various types of information agencies managed by librarians, appropriately educated professionals. The purpose of this paper is to examine the current and apparent future roles of librarians within the context of modern society, and to articulate the knowledge (theory, skills, and attitudes) which could be packaged in the curriculum of a professional school of library and information science. Beginning with an analysis of the role of information and libraries in a "Learning Society," the library profession's rationale for professional education is used as a philosophical foundation for a model curriculum. The model presented in this paper proposes resolution to the educational questions raised above. While other models exist and still others will be forthcoming, this model is presented to facilitate debate, thought, and, perhaps, progress in library and information science education. 34
Professional Education for the Learning Society Role of Librarians in Society The application of knowledge is a matter of critical concern in a postind'ustrial society, a knowledge-based society. In their discussion of our "new society," Holzner and Marx asserted that "knowledge workers such as scientists and professionals occupy a particularly important place."10 Ina society which is marked by rapid change, a proliferation of knowledge, and a technological boom, the creation, organization, dis- semination, and retrieval of information and knowledge is critical. Holz- ner and Marx summarized the sociological attributes of modern society as follows: 1. A service economy of predominantly white collar workers; 2. A "highly educated, specialized, technical-scientific and pro- fessional personnel"; 3. A central role for technology and knowledge; 4. An important role for knowledge workers, such as professionals and scientists; 5. A social memory with infinite detail; 6. Greater stress on scientific or proven knowledge; 7. A learning society which must learn to learn and adapt to change thoughout life; 8. Stress on the organized application of knowledge." Within the context of this rapidly changing, knowledge-centered so- ciety, libraries and other information agencies should play a central role. Shera has described that role as communicating knowledge; the library is a vital link in the communication systems of any society. "Without com- munication there can be no society, and without some form of graphic record and a means for the preservation of that record there can be no enduring culture."12 Libraries facilitate the communication of ideas and knowledge of one society to another and from one generation to the next. Ideas and knowledge are recorded and preserved on graphic records, enabling their collection, organization, storage, and retrieval by contemporaries or by succeeding generations. With the emergence of the computer and its capability for the storage and retrieval of vast amounts of information, the traditional role of librarians is complicated, and their role must be rede- fined or, at least, clarified. Because of the vast amounts of information generated and stored in recent years, selection, organization, and re- trieval for the purpose of research, education, and decision-making is increasingly more complex. Also, the most efficient use of information available is becoming a greater challenge. Librarians must attempt to select the relevant information, the "nuggets," from among the vast 35
Journal of Education for Library and Information Sciknck amounts available. If necessary, the librarian must be able to synthesize this information for the ready use of clients so that the information is used efficiently. In order to fulfill the library's societal role in modern society librarians must be more involved in the selection and utilization of information by the library's constituents. The education for library and information professionals must prepare individuals to assume this more active role coping with new technology and vast amounts of information. Professional education must prepare individuals to become change agents in a profession which may be altered radically during the career of an individual. The necessary theories, skills, and undergraduate background for future library and information pro- fessionals are discussed below. Guidelines for Library Professional Education In 1970, the American Library Association (ALA) Council adopted the following definition of professional: The title "Librarian" carries with it the connotation of "Professional" in the sense that professional tasks are those which require a special background and education on the basis of which library needs are identified, problems are analyzed, goals are set, and original and creative solutions are formulated for them, integrating theory into practice, and planning, organizing, communicating, and administering successful programs of service to users of the library's materials and services. In defining services to users, the professional person recognizes potential users as well as current ones, and designs services which will reach all who could benefit from them.1* This professional definition, used as the basis for standards for ac- creditation of library professional schools, indicates that a profession does need certain competencies which are skill level, e.g., operating media hardware and organizing information. However, other competencies require higher level thinking or cognitive processes, e.g., information needs analysis, problem solving, goal setting, planning, communicating, and managing. Indeed, the definition, in its totality and in spirit, indicates that a library professional is in every sense a manager and leader. Standards for Accreditation, adopted by the ALA Council June 27, 1972, and implemented January 1 , 1973, require professional library education programs to provide the educational experiences described in the above statement.14 While these standards currently are being studied for pos- sible revision, they will be considered here as they are the current basis for evaluation of professional schools. The standard for a curriculum includes the following guidelines for a professional course of study: The curriculum should be a unified whole rather than an aggregate of courses. It should (1) stress understanding rather than rote learning of facts; principles and skills rather than routines; (2) emphasize the significance and functions of the subjects taught; (3) 36
Professional Education for the Learning Society reflect the findings of a basic and applied research in librarianship and related dis- ciplines; (4) respond to current trends in library development and professional edu- cation; (5) promote continuous professional growth.15 The professional education program articulated by Greerl(i l7 is a one- year graduate program which prepares professionals as defined by the American Library Association and the Williamson report. This cur- riculum, as implemented at the University of Southern California in 1980, accredited by the American Library Association in 1984, and replicated with modifications at Emporia State University in 1983, has been cited by Dyer and O'Connor18 and Cronin1'1 in recent studies of library education programs. The conceptual framework of that cur- riculum is presented here as a response to the continuing debate regard- ing skills versus theory in professional education and as a model for library and information science education programs. Elements of this program are: (1) a solid general undergraduate edu- cation, (2) prerequisite skills level professional courses, (3) a core of theory and tool courses for individual "specialization." These elements are described below. Undergraduate Education The Williamson Report, commissioned by the Carnegie Corporation to study the education of library workers, recommended the requirement of "an approved college course of four years" for admission to a professional school for librarians.20 Since 1951, the American Library Association has accredited only master's degree programs, and the present Standards for Accreditation state that admission to professional programs "should nor- mally be limited to holders of the bachelor's degree representing a broad academic education from an accredited institution."21 The standards do provide for students with subject specialization; indeed, such special- ization is often desired for some entry level positions, as noted by Asheim.22 It is also at the undergraduate level that some skills required of infor- mation professionals can be learned. Conant summarized the debate surrounding the introduction of professional skills courses at the under- graduate level, and recommended moving some introductory and orien- tation material to an undergraduate level, leaving only graduate-level courses in the master's degree programs.2* These courses available to upper division undergraduate students, should enable students to: 1. Understand clerical operations and basic terms common to the operation of libraries and information centers. 2. Operate media hardware, and produce software common to most libraries and information centers. 37
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 3. Evaluate and use printed information sources common to most libraries and information centers. 4. Understand and use the cataloging data bases and tools most com- mon in libraries. 5. Understand and use new technology and online data bases. Students may meet these prerequisite requirements through appropri- ate course work (at USC, these courses are self-paced laboratories and at ESU they are courses), through work experience, or through successful completion of an exemption examination. These are tasks or skills which may be performed regularly by a library assistant or technician, using ALA's designations for library workers.24 The professional supervises clerks and paraprofessionals in these tasks, and Asheim noted, some of the work done by first level professionals will be similar to that of high level library assistants, but "the distinction lies in the greater dependence upon principles and specialized skills uniquely related to librarianship and information science."25 In summary, selected skills courses may be taken as part of a baccalau- reate degree program or, more often, taken as prerequisite courses. Core Theory and Tools Courses The definition of a professional discussed above and articulated in Library Education and Manpower stresses the leadership role of the pro- fessional. According to that definition, the professional must identify and diagnose information needs; and "the professional person recognizes potential users as well as current ones." Based on this needs assessment, the professional analyzes problems, sets goals, and finds "original and creative solutions," "integrating theory into practice." Translating this definition into a graduate curriculum suggests the following objectives for a core of courses required of a prospective librarian or other information professional working in any environment (school, college, business, etc.). An entry level professional should be able to: 1. Articulate a philosophy of the library and information professions. The prospective librarian must assess his/her own value system, com- pare it to the values promoted within the profession through its literature and formal statements (e.g., "Library Bill of Rights," "Ethics Statement"). The student must begin formulating a professional philosophy which will provide a framework for setting priorities and interacting with the pro- fession. This philosophy enables the professional to have a wide view of the profession as recommended by Shera; the professional understands the role of the library in its community and within society, generally. This 38
Professional Education for the Learning Society philosophy enables the professional to make sound decisions, providing the value system which will influence future decisions. A professional philosophy is necessary for the change agent role of librarians. 2. Recognize basic human behavior patterns applied to the com- munication of information. While the first objective relates to the librarian, the second concerns the user or consumer of information. The prospective librarian must be familiar with psychological theories associated with individual needs, selection, processing, and use of information. A psychology course ap- plied to the library/information profession is somewhat analogous to educational psychology - a selected segment of behavioral science ap- plied to the education profession. The library professional who is aware of existing theories on individual needs and behavior patterns can better diagnose needs and design and implement services that integrate more effectively clientele behaviors and constraints. This course addresses Shera's concern: It is important to librarians that they be supported as much as possible by an under- standing of those psychological and other mental processes through which the individual receives and assimilates knowledge, that they know as much as can be known, given our present limitations, of the cognitive process.26 3. Comprehend the theory and general patterns of information trans- fer in society. The focus of library service has been on individuals, and objective #2 concerns study of the individual, yet every individual who uses a library is a member of societal groups, playing several roles and working within the context of those subsocieties. That group may be a profession, a dis- cipline, or member of a group because of age, race, etc. Greer applies the term "information transfer" to the structure of unique social patterns and systems associated with the creation, recording, production, organization, dissemination, use and preservation of information by groups.27 Shera identified the need for this study: We are concerned here with a body of knowledge about knowledge itself. How knowl- edge has developed and been augmented has long been a subject of study, but how knowledge is coordinated, integrated, and put to work is yet an almost unrecognized field of investigation.8 Although, Shera used the term knowledge and Green uses information, defined as recorded knowledge,29 the societal implications of information is the focus of this curriculum objective. This course, among other things, explores the general patterns, with some specific examples of creation, dissemination, and organization of information in society. Included are such topics as censorship, publishing and other means of recording knowledge, bibliographic control, and information policy as these in- fluence, enhance, or inhibit those general patterns of information trans- fer, all from a societal point of view. 39
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 4. Articulate the major methods of organizing information for use in the design and implementation of information systems. This objective concerns the systematic organization of information for convenient and efficient retrieval by the information user. The infor- mation professional should be familiar with the underlying principles and theory associated with systems most used for organizing information (Dewey Decimal Classification System, Library of Congress, subject head- ing thesauri, and automated retrieval systems, for example) so that the professional can select and adapt, or design a new file or system as appropriate. On the basis of community analysis and client needs diag- nosis, the professional should be able to apply relevant theory in order to select or design the organization schema most appropriate for the needs of clients. Consequently, the professional must be able to critique the commonly used systems for the purpose of organizing, storing, and retrieving information. The professional should be able to design a customized system for the retrieval of information using the appropriate technology. 5. Manage an information system, employing appropriate manage- ment theory. Management is a major component of the information professional's role. Based on a needs analysis and diagnosis, the professional must determine and define the information agency's mission; delineate objec- tives for fulfilling that mission; develop policies for the selection and organization of information, information delivery, and personnel in operations; devise optimal strategies for implementation; and oversee evaluation of the information delivery systems. Management or organiza- tion theory, sociology of information, psychology of information use, and systems theory are all significant theoretical bases for management of information systems. The information professional must have a knowl- edge of these theories and the ability to synthesize and apply them to a specific organization. The professional also must have the ability to lead his/her staff toward the goals and objectives established for the agency. In addition, the successful manager must be able to employ appropriate methods of needs analysis, systems analysis, and research, as described below. 6. Analyze information needs of a client group. This ability to employ systematic techniques for gathering and analy- zing accurate data on client information needs is critical to the selection, organization, and delivery of information sources and services of all kinds. The results of the needs analysis determines the mission, goals, objectives, and strategies of the agency. Diagnosing and satisfying the 40
Professional Education for the Learning Society information needs of users is essential for agencies which are supported financially by their clients. Data collection strategies include observation and use of unobtrusive measures, census data, commonly maintained library use data, and com- munity directories. Analysis of data requires integration of relevant psychological and sociological theories for a broad diagnosis which can be translated into a mission statement and goals, objectives, policies, and strategies for designing and implementing information systems and services. 7. Apply appropriate research methodologies and interpret research results in the management of an information system. The information professional must be able to manage efficiently and to make enlightened management decisions based on data. All information agencies are accountable to a governing body which allocates funds, and the information professional is accountable for the information services provided; the information professional must be able to demonstrate the effectiveness of the information agencies. To make effective decisions and to evaluate services, the information professional must be able to supervise, conduct, and interpret research done in his/her agency as well as research reported in professional literature. The professional must be able to design a procedure for gathering data which will enhance man- agement decision-making. Knowledge of research methods is an essential management tool. 8. Evaluate and design an information system, employing appropri- ate methods and technologies. As another management tool, the information professional must be able to evaluate systematically subsystems within an information agency and to revise or design a new subsystem, employing technology as appro- priate. For example, based on a needs assessment, it might be determined that the need for an information referral service has been demonstrated. The professional should be able to evaluate the current service, plan a revised or new service, specify the requirement for the subsystem which will enable implementation of that service, and recommend the appro- priate hardware and software as required. A plan for evaluation of the revised service also would be incorporated. The systems analysis component of a curriculum provides a tool which enables the professional to construct a system or subsystem, merging management theory (objective #5), research methods (objective #7), and systems analysis techniques to meet the information needs of a client group as determined by a needs analysis (objective #6). 41
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 9. Design appropriate services for a particular environment based on the comprehension of the societal functions of libraries and infor- mation centers (educational, cultural, informational, research, rec- reational, and bibliographic functions). The societal functions of libraries have been defined by Greer,30 Butler,31 Downs,32 Shera,33 Stevenson,34 and others. The information professional, based upon a personal professional philosophy (objective #1), and using knowledge of individual infor- mation seeking behavior (#2), of societal information transfer patterns (#3), of information organization theory (#4), and of management theory and tools (#5-8), should be able to plan information services according to the needs of the agency's clientele. The societal functions or roles of libraries are broadly defined as educational, cultural, informational, research, recreational, and biblio- graphic. Information professionals must be aware of these historical and current roles of libraries in society, and they must be able to plan strategies for selecting, implementing, and evaluating various types of services at appropriate levels according to the clients' needs. For each service designed to serve a specific function (educational, recreational, etc.), the information professional should be able to identify, select, acquire, organize, store, retrieve, repackage as necessary, and deselect the appropriate information sources to support services required for the clientele. Impact of environment (school, university, public li- brary, corporation, etc.) will be a factor as well, although the emphasis should be on the singular needs of a particular library. These information needs may be met by designing and implementing an appropriate level of service. The above objectives define the learning objectives for a core of courses required of all prospective library and information professionals. Re- gardless of the student's career emphasis, the above objectives should comprise a central required core for all students. Following is a summary of elective educational experiences. Electives Because the master's degree is an entry level professional degree, it can be assumed that it should provide opportunities to permit students to select elective courses compatible with their career goals. Students should have a choice of at least two emphasis areas for their elective courses: (1) library and information management, or (2) infor- mation systems design. The former area prepares students to diagnose need and design, implement, and evaluate information services in a specific environment (school, public library, college, etc.). The latter emphasis area enables students to diagnose need and design, implement, 42
Professional Education for the Learning Society and evaluate a system for organizing and retrieving information man- ually or online. Students wishing to specialize in cataloging or online searching, for example, might elect this emphasis. Among electives may be a practicum requiring specific experiences in a library or other information agency, independent study courses, thesis, independent research, history of libraries or the library and information profession, online searching, indexing and abstracting, information transfer in disciplines and among special groups (social sciences, science and technology, humanities, children, young adults, etc.). Also among elective courses would be seminars by type of library service (educational, recreational, research, etc.) to enable students to gain experience in the design of services. For example, the educational service course would survey the historical role of libraries in the educational process, examine the purpose of education in society, and study the role of libraries in education from preschool through graduate school. The course should include the application of learning theory to design of an educational library service in a particular situation. Students should have the opportunity to take coursework to acquire more knowledge in such areas as management, computer science, com- munication, psychology, or sociology. Students may wish to take elective courses in such disciplines as history, literature, or language to broaden their knowledge of a discipline which may better prepare them for their professional goal. The choice of electives enables the student a limited opportunity to specialize in one or more areas of the profession. The intent of the master's degree program is to prepare a student to enter the profession. Since the M.L.S. or its equivalent is a generalist degree, the extent of specialization should be controlled. While working in the profession, the individual learns on the job, through in-service training programs, through continuing education activities of various kinds, and through additional coursework. The professional may go on to acquire a second master's degree, a sixth-year degree, or a doctorate. The master's degree should provide the core of knowledge, the intellectual foundation, on which the professional builds a career. This paper presents a curriculum model which addresses concerns within the library profession as they have been expressed in the pro- fessional literature. The model suggests undergraduate or prerequisite knowledge, a core curriculum for a master's degree, and suggested electives. These suggested learning experiences are those which have been proposed by leaders within the profession and accepted by the profession itself through officially adopted guidelines and standards. The model curriculum is a response to the information needs of con- 43
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science temporary society; it provides courses intended to foster problem solving, establish a professional philosophy, and to learn the basic values, knowl- edge, and skills required for successful work in the profession today. Modern society places new demands on libraries. Within modern society, a "learning society," libraries and information centers can play a vital role, as noted in Alliance for Excellence: "Libraries cannot be tied to the past. Rather, libraries, newly energized, freshly chartered, can become centers of the Learning Society."35 In order for libraries to assume a central position in this information age, schools of library and information science also must not be tied to the past; however, professional schools should build on the best ideas from the past. Professional schools must design and implement curricula which prepare graduates to cope effectively with the rapid change within our society. Both libraries and library schools must change, but change can be disconcerting, and many reasons can be elicited for refusing change. However, without change, there is only complacency and stagnation. With the swirl of societal change about us, there is little choice but to risk change so that schools of library and information science can successfully prepare professionals who will provide leadership in our "Learning Society." References and Notes 1. Alliance for Excellence; Librarians Respond to a Nation at Risk. Washington, U.S. Department of Education, 1984, p. 42. 2. Derr, R.L.: The Integration of Theory and Practice in Professional Programs. Journal of Education for Ltbrananshtp, 23:193-206, Winter 1983. 3. Morehead, J.: Theory and Practice in Library Education. Littleton, CO, Libraries Unlimited, 1980. 4. White, H.S.: Defining Basic Competencies. American Libraries, 14:519-525, Sept. 1983. 5. White, H.S.: Subverted by Pragmatism. Library Journal, 109:861-862, May 1, 1984. 6. Battin, P.: Developing University and Research Library Professionals: A Director's Perspective. American Libraries, 14:22-25, Jan. 1983. 7. Koenig, M.E.: Education for Special Librarianship. Special Libraries, 74:182-196, April 1983. 8. Griffiths, J.M.: Our Competencies Defined: A Progress Report and Sampling. American Libraries, 15:43-45, Jan. 1984. 9. "The Intellectual Foundations for Information Professionals: Criteria for New Educational Pro- grams." Conference at Emporia State University, Emporia, KS, November 15-18, 1984. 10. Holzner, B., and Marx, J.H.: Knowledge Application: The Knowledge System in Society. Boston, Allyn & Bacon, 1979, p. 13. U.lbid., pp. 9-15. 12. Shera, J.H.: Librarianship, Philosophy of. ALA World Encyclopedia of Library and Information Services. Chicago, American Library Association, 1980, p. 315. 13. Library Education and Manpower; A Statement of Policy Adopted by the Council of the American Library Association, June 30, 1970. Chicago, ALA, 1970, p. 3. This statement was edited for sexist language and reissued in 1976. 14. Standards for Accreditation. Chicago, American Library Association, 1972, p. 5. 15. Ibid. 16. Creer, R.C.: Information Transfer: A New Focus for Library Education. In: Be ne field, A.R., and Kazlauskas, E.J., eds.: Communicating Information; Proceedings of the 43rd ASIS Annual Meeting, 1980. New York, American Society for Information Science, 1980. 44
Professional Education for the Learning Society 17. Greer, R.C.: Information Transfer: A Conceptual Model for Librarianship, Information Science and Information Management. Great Plains Libraries, 20:3-10, 1982. 18. Dyer, E., and O'Connor, D.: Inside Our Schools; Crisis in Library Education. Wilson Library Bulletin, 57:860-861, June 1983. 19. Cronin, B.: The Transition Years: New Initiatives in the Education of Professional Information Workers. London, Aslib, in preparation. 20. Williamson, C.C.: Training for Library Service. Boston, Merrymount Press, 1923, p. 137. 21. Standards for Accreditation, ref. 14, p. 8. 22. Asheim, L.E.: Education and Manpower for Librarianship; First Steps Toward a Statement of Policy. ALA Bulletin, 62:1 100, Oct. 1968. 23. Conant, R.W.: The Conant Report; A Study of the Education for Librarians. Cambridge, MIT Press, 1980, p. 172. 24. Library Education and Manpower, ref. 13. 25. Asheim, ref. 22, p. 1099. 26. Shera, ref. 12, p. 317. 27. (ìreer, R.C.: "A Model for the Discipline of Information Science." A paper delivered at the conference, "The Intellectual Foundations for Information Professionals: Criteria for New Educational Programs," Emporia State University, Emporia, KS, Nov. 15-18, 1984. 28. Shera, ref. 12, p. 316. 29. (ireer, ref. 27. 30. Greer, refs. 16, 17. 31. Butler, P.: The Cultural Function of the Library. The Library Quarterly, 22:79-91, April 1952. 32. Downs, R.B.: Problems of Bibliographic Control. Library Trends, 2:498-508, April 1954. 33. Shera, J.H.: The Reference Function of the Library. In: Shera, J.H.: Knowing Books and Men; Knowing Computers, Too. Littleton, CO, Libraries Unlimited, 1973. This and other works by Shera discuss the reference, educational, bibliographic, and cultural functions of libraries in society. 34. Stevenson, G.: Popular Culture and the Public Library. In: Voigt, M.J., and Harris, M.H., eds: Advances in Librarianship, vol. 7. New York, 1977, pp. 177-229. 35. Alliance for Excellence . . ., ref. 1, p. 5.