From Our Readers . . . The membership of REFORMA, the National Association to Promote Library Services to the Spanish Speak- ing, is quite alarmed and dismayed about the fact and fiction in the article by Donald O. Case and John V. Richardson, entitled "Predictors of Student Performance with Emphasis on Gender and Ethnic Determinants, ' ' in the Journal of Education for Library and Information Science (Winter 1990). We are deeply disappointed that UCLA's Graduate School of Library and In- formation Science has not shown more leadership in this continuing controversy. While it is a fact that Dean Beverly P. Lynch addressed the REFORMA membership at the ALA Annual Conference this past June, it is not sufficient to simply reassure and restate in deeply emphatic terms the commitment of UCLA's GSLIS to the recruitment and retention of eth- nic minorities. It is also a fact that the majority of GSLIS faculty do not sup- port the article, as evidenced by a let- ter dated 6-15-90 sent to the Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci- ence. REFORMA has, like the faculty, strong criticism about the article. The article is seriously flawed at best, and at worst it resorts to blaming the victims for their alleged failure in library school, a characteristically rac- ist ploy. We resent the article's allega- tion that minority students are not motivated enough or committed to the library profession. We cannot believe that minorities drop out of library school because affirmative action has created a cornucopia of lucrative job opportunities. Library schools need to conduct a serious introspective exami- nation, focusing on, among other items, current demonstrated commit- ment in support and in the spirit of af- firmative action and cultural diver- sity. They are not providing a supportive environment for their mi- nority students. The information and results offered in the article are an in- dictment of the Graduate School of Li- brary and Information Science at UCLA. It reflects the failure to suc- cessfully retain the minority students enrolled, which is all the more frus- trating to REFORMA given recent efforts to -increase minority enroll- ment. When students drop out of school, it is the school that should re- ceive the failing grade for creating a nonsupportive environment for the minority student. Many of us remem- ber the astounding success of the GLI SA program at the University of Arizona. That program recognized the value of a truly supportive and nurturing environment and produced many outstanding Latino librarians. We are all aware that students need- ing assistance or counseling demand time and care. The REFORMA/ UCLA Mentor Program provides a large amount of counseling and assis- tance to proteges, but the main re- sponsibility must rest with the faculty. When REFORMA members read that "dropouts waste an inordinate amount of faculty and staff energy, considering the time spent reviewing each application for admission and counseling students who are doing poorly or who are dissatisfied with the program/' we can only conclude the authors find minority students a time- consuming bother. Let no one confuse or associate REFORMA 's criticism with an at- Summer/Fall 1991 147
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tack on academic and intellectual free- dom. The article's authors have every right to publish their opinions and re- search. REFORMA encourages re- search in the area of minorities and li- brary schools, but not reckless and insensitive reports that dash a minor- ity student's hopes and dreams. Let us all take this as an opportunity to move forward and assist those willing to live a commitment to cultural diversity in the library profession. REFORMA is offering to any li- brary school, but specifically to UCLA's GSLIS faculty, a three-hour presentation on Latino issues in li- brary science and the profession. This is REFORMA' s answer, and we feel it is a positive step toward ameliorat- ing what appears to be a prejudicial mind-set among some faculty of what it means to be a man or woman of color - a minority in UCLA's Gradu- ate School of Library and Information Science. Ronald Rodriguez President, National REFORMA Library education has, from the earliest days of the American Library Association, been a significant part of the association's concern. Although accreditation is most frequently asso- ciated with ALA's role in library edu- cation, the association has also en- couraged the development of library schools. It is now in the position of needing to encourage their survival. With the closing of the School of Li- brary Service at Columbia Univer- sity, the number of private institu- tions with library education programs is further reduced. Perhaps worse for the field of librarianship, the number of programs that can prepare doctoral candidates for leadership roles in re- search, administration, teaching, and innovative practice becomes very small. As a past president of the American Library Association, I am dedicated to a strong profession with its partici- pants well prepared in library educa- tion programs housed in highly re- garded institutions of higher education. I believe that these pro- grams have to be geographically ac- cessible. I know they need excellent faculty, and that the pool of candi- dates for the many faculty positions that can be anticipated in the near fu- ture is also quite limited. I am aware that the glib response to these prob- lems in some regions is to open the ranks of librarians to those who are not academically well prepared, and I believe that is the wrong response. In- stead, I recommend that the associa- tion encourage a program of action in- cluding, but not limited to, the following: 1 . Encourage increased communi- cation between practicing librarians and the library education programs in their region as well as the library edu- cation programs from which they graduated. 2. Sponsor research especially re- lating to the links between university libraries and library education pro- grams, identifying mutual concerns, shared agendas for research and de- velopment, and the needs for prepara- tion of librarians for positions in those university libraries, as well as in the larger community. 3. Call attention, through public relations and publications, to the dy- namic library education programs that exist, and identify the characteris- tics that have contributed not merely to their survival but to their success. 4. Encourage the Committee on Accreditation and its site visit teams to take a more assertive stance in regard to library education programs, e.g., directly commending them for aspects of their program that contribute to ex- cellence, communicating with admin- istrators about the strengths of the programs as well as about the needs and weaknesses, and keeping in their own minds a vision of the continuing needs for library education programs and a recognition that it is almost al- ways better to bolster and contribute 148 Volume 32, Numbers 1/2
From Our Readers . . . to a developing or diminished pro- gram than it is to attempt to develop a new program from the ground up. 5. Develop an informal network of support for administrators of library education programs that they may tap when they sense that their programs are targeted for review. Provide a forum for discussion of such issues as whether library educa- tion programs ought to consider revis- ing their scope, mission, administra- tive structures, or other characteristics, e.g., to teach some undergraduate courses, to form cooperative (interin- stitutional) doctoral programs, or to be the channel of more continuing- education opportunities designed for librarians. Peeerv Sullivan Director, Northern Illinois Univer- sity Libraries Summer/Fall 1991 149