Intellectual Freedom Lectures and the Dilemma of Offense-Free Teaching Ann Curry Teaching intellectual freedom concepts to library and information science students has become increasingly problematic due to faculty, university administration, and student confusion about what constitutes sexual harassment and racial discrimina- tion, and what the boundaries of academic freedom may be. Discussion of intellectual freedom issues often centers on issues such as homosexuality and racial hatred which may cause student discomfort and embarrassment. Disagreement about the parameters of university racial and sexual harassment codes and ambiguity of language within these codes can lead to students misinterpreting intellectual uneasiness as harass- ment. An examination of codes from universities with ALA-accredited library and information science programs reveals the weaknesses in these codes and the lack of protection afforded to those teaching controversial topics. During the past few years, university administrations have found it increas- ingly politic to formulate policies on racial discrimination and sexual harass- ment that govern the relationship be- tween faculty and students. As with most new policies, the university com- munity has encountered difficulties in interpreting what is meant by sexual harassment, racial innuendo, "inappro- priate speech," etc., in actual applica- tion. The development of workable policies satisfactory to all constituents has been further complicated by ex- tremist positions that activists on both sides have tended to adopt as initial bargaining positions. Some students and faculty members interpret racial and sexual issues to encompass a very broad domain of potentially offensive material. Even basic course content not originally targeted by policy for- mulators has become enmeshed in the debates. With universities more sensitive than in previous decades to minority group rights, and the exploration of per- sonal feelings coming to mean more than the examination of ideas, teaching intellectual freedom concepts to library and information science students has become more precarious than Kister de- scribed a generation ago.1 Students, professors, and administrators are buf- feted by power shifts affecting their in- teraction. The professor is clearly no longer "in control." Students have gained greater rights in decision-mak- ing and redress, and formerly marginal- ized groups, notably women and racial minorities, are demanding that courses address their particular educational concerns, and are being heeded. The university is strengthened by changes Winter 1997 43
44 Journal of Education for Library and information Science About the Author Ann Curry is Assistant Professor, School of Library, Archival, and Infor- mation Studies, University of British Columbia, Vancouver. This paper was presented at the 1996 ALISE Conference. that eliminate harmful sexual and racial behaviors and achieve greater inclu- siveness within the curriculum and teaching methods. However, promoting these changes becomes harmful when students are allowed to equate intel- lectual or emotional discomfort with the "crime" of harassment, and when, as a result, course content and teach- ing methods are censured in the name of sexual and racial equality.2 This paper examines the difficulties of teaching intellectual freedom topics to students in ALA-accredited pro- grams of library and information sci- ence in this changing climate. It examines, in particular, the influ- ences of sexual and racial harassment policies adopted by their universities. Specific Concerns In June, 1995, a consultant's report charged that long-standing "pervasive racism and sexism" existed within the Department of Political Science at the University of British Columbia (UBC).3 The report cited a broad range of stu- dent complaints about unnamed profes- sors, including unwanted sexual attention, racial and gender inequities, inappropriate teaching styles, and dam- aging comments about students' lack of academic ability. The University Presi- dent immediately implemented all the report's recommendations, including suspension of graduate admissions to the department. Many faculty members strongly protested this latter move, say- ing that the charges were unproven even in the report, and the nature of some complaints posed a threat to aca- demic freedom. The suspension was subsequently lifted after the depart- ment and the dean of Graduate Studies reached a formal agreement in a number of areas, including structures and pro- cedures for addressing racially and sexually-oriented complaints. The ba- sic issue, however, is still far from re- solved. The substance, intensity, and divisiveness of faculty and student dis- cussions during this continuing cam- pus-wide crisis - and the disturbing tenor of student comments recently re- ceived by the author - suggest that much confusion exists about what constitutes unacceptable pedagogical practice. Pro- fessors are urgently concerned about how best to teach controversial topics. As an illustration of the difficulties of applying intellectual freedom phi- losophies and policies, the author has given first-year students case studies to read and discuss in class. One case in- volves community protests over an AIDS-awareness library display that in- cluded photographs of condoms, syr- inges, and gay couples embracing. In the lively discussions that follow, stu- dents voice diverse opinions about li- brary roles and responsibilities, the effectiveness of shocking or offensive displays and the risks and conse- quences of insulting library customers. After one particular class, two students privately voiced concerns to the author. One, whose strong religious beliefs do not include acceptance of homosexual- Volume 38. Number 1
Intellectual Freedom Lectures 45 ity, was very disturbed by fellow stu- dents' critical comments about funda- mentalist Christian beliefs and complained that the discussion caused discomfort and created a difficult learn- ing atmosphere. The other, who had previously disclosed to the professor his/her homosexuality, was upset be- cause the subject chosen for the case study "singled out gays and lesbians as a problem group" and opened the pos- sibility for negative comments about "promoting" a gay lifestyle. The student felt "harassed," although no student di- rected personal comments at this stu- dent or any other. The author held lengthy private discussions with each student, which appeared to calm their concerns and dissuade them from pur- suing a more formal complaint. These and similar, if less specifi- cally directed, complaints have caused this academic, who is still untenured, to be wary and uneasy when teaching con- tentious topics. The terms that the stu- dents use- "discomfort," "difficult learning atmosphere," and "harass- ment" - appear in many university codes of proscribed practice; and these complaints can lead to an instructor's suspension. Such incidents tempt one to teach in a far less open manner, to "bowdlerize" the intellectual freedom lecture. In 1818, Dr. Bowdler expur- gated sexual and religious allusions from Shakespeare's plays so they could be read aloud without offending family members of any age.4 Nearly two hun- dred years later, it is distressing that professors consider repressing contro- versial and possibly offensive subject matter so that no student may complain about being offended. Why Teach Intellectual Freedom? The apparent problems with the subject of intellectual freedom prompt ques- tions about the advisability of teaching it at all, and, in fact, this point was raised at a recent university-sponsored workshop on sexual harassment at UBC following the report described above.5 This is not a new question. Berning- hausen strongly supported inclusion of intellectual freedom in the curriculum in 1967. He believed that professors of library science have a responsibility to persuade students that "they have cho- sen a profession that commits them to the principle of intellectual freedom." He further maintained that many in- coming students do not appreciate the significance of free inquiry and there- fore faculty members must impress upon students the need for open schol- arship if humanity's needs are to be met.6 Kister, who in 1968 offered the first library school course devoted pri- marily to intellectual freedom, decried the "ready willingness" of working li- brarians to violate ALA policies on cen- sorship. He advocated more effective teaching of intellectual freedom to in- still "a toughness, an assertiveness, [and] a combativeness" that would en- able graduates to hold firm when faced with censorship challenges.7 Shuman also felt strongly that students who lack an awareness of intellectual freedom is- sues are ill-prepared for the emotional intensity of customer complaints. His 1977 survey of ALA-accredited schools revealed, however, that not all faculty members were as supportive of includ- ing intellectual freedom in the curricu- lum. Nine percent of responding faculty disagreed, strongly disagreed, had no opinion, or were undecided about its inclusion while those remaining were in agreement or strong agreement.8 More recent writers on this subject, Woodward9 and White,10 place the teaching of intellectual freedom con- cepts within the broader context of eth- ics: the former focuses on deontological and consequential reasoning processes; Winter 1997
46 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science the latter emphasizes the painful fric- tion students experience when they must confront contradictory personal, professional, and employer values. While these educators endorse the direct inclusion of intellectual freedom in the curriculum, each recognizes as well the troublesome questions associ- ated with the subject. Perhaps these concerns explain the lack of total fac- ulty commitment to the topic shown in Shuman's survey. For example: ■ Is it acceptable to challenge per- sonal values and beliefs when teach- ing intellectual freedom? ■ If an instructor describes a specific action (such as censorship) as either "right" or "wrong," is this not an unbalanced promotion of one's per- sonal view of society? ■ Isn't today's librarianship becoming just a neutral exercise in the techno- logical expertise of information han- dling using computers? ■ Aren't censorship and free access equally valid ways of handling in- formation, and doesn't the responsi- bility for applying one of them be- long to one's employer? ■ Is intellectual freedom a subject for intellectual examination at all, or is it just "politics"? Does Language Matter? Some writers claim that conservative traditionalists have created a non-exis- tent political correctness monster in order to discredit any change in univer- sity curricula.11 They discount a per- ceived threat to intellectual freedom by claiming that accusations of political correctness are largely being used by professors to avoid even the remotest engagement with the claims of discrimi- nation advanced by those seeking change. These critics of conservatives do not fear that changes will threaten free speech; rather they worry that the opponents of change are becoming in- creasingly defensive and obsessive in their defense of old curricula, and thus are advocating a closed, restricted, and limited intellectual inquiry opposed to anything new and different. But others are more sanguine about the recent changes in universities. Al- though they applaud the increased plu- ralism in the student body and curriculum, equity programs based on race and gender, and the encouragement of a multiplicity of voices in debates, they nevertheless fear that along with such changes have come crippling ob- sessions with words and a dangerous belief in the primacy of student self- confidence. They feel that present em- phases move the university away from an arena in which real debate and action are possible into a linguistic world in which substantive concerns are aban- doned for a focus on what one labels people and whether or not they are suf- ficiently comfortable.12 Political cor- rectness often appears to tell one what to say - and by implication, perhaps, what to think - and in so doing, does impose restrictions on the development of knowledge through totally free de- bate, the chosen method of instruction in universities for centuries. As a result, a creed that was supposed to embody tolerance has come to represent intoler- ance. For both faculty and students, the anxiety not to be thought judgmental has developed into a rejection of all judgment, for fear of causing offense or denying people their rights.13 Campus Codes on Racial and Sexual Harassment and Discrimination University-level codes that might affect the teaching of intellectual freedom in Volume 38, Number 1
Intellectual Freedom Lectures 47 programs of library and information science were requested from all ALA- accredited schools. The request was first directed to the universities and produced limited results. Requests sub- sequently made by e-mail and fax di- rectly to library-school deans and directors resulted in twenty-nine of fifty-seven schools sending information about codes and/or copies of the codes themselves. Four additional codes were secured through an Internet search. The thirty-three codes were analyzed to de- termine what sections of these codes might possibly be applied to inhibit the teaching of intellectual freedom. Sources of particular policy quotes are indicated in parentheses. The following factors emerged. Psychological Environment Policies frequently describe a desirable or undesirable psychological environ- ment. For example: An essential part of our mission is the provision of an academic environment in which all of our students and faculty are encouraged and supported in the ad- vancement of learning, and in which in- tolerance, sexism, and bigotry have no place. (Alberta) . . . the University is committed to maintaining an educational and working environment free of conduct which de- grades or subjugates employees or stu- dents. (Clark Atlanta) It is the policy of the University to pro- vide a safe and comfortable learning and working environment for students and employees. (Hawaii) Sexual harassment refers to comment or conduct of a sexual nature . . . when [it] is intended to, or has the effect of, creat- ing an intimidating or hostile environ- ment. (British Columbia) Many American university policies are based on the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's definition of sexual harassment. The definition pro- scribes conduct that creates "an intimi- dating, hostile or offensive working environment. " Universities frequently add the word "academic" to the com- mission's description of a "working" environment. The major concern with policies that prescribe desired environments is that a "comfortable" learning environ- ment is virtually antithetical to effec- tive discussion of intellectual freedom. According to Kister and White, good teaching of this subject requires the broadening of students' perspectives by challenging their opinions and preju- dices, especially through the use of case studies. Kister describes non-confronta- tional, risk-free learning sessions in which the professor waves around the Library Bill of Rights as "intellectually insulting and debilitating."14 He says this "well-meaning but shallow" method never succeeds in developing in stu- dents a critical awareness of the profes- sional commitments associated with complex censorship controversies. In- stead, he recommends an "uninhibited airing of ideas" and an in-depth examina- tion of sexual expression and obscenity, including examples of pornographic ma- terials. White also endorses a disputa- tious method in teaching intellectual freedom, provided it remains civil. He encourages professors to play devil's advocate during case-study discussions by challenging and questioning every- thing students say to make them justify opinions and recommended actions.15 Overall, neither the subject matter (e.g., pornography, race, ethics) nor the peda- gogical methods described contribute to a "comfortable" learning environment, making intellectual freedom courses taught in this way vulnerable to censure if such an environment is mandated. Winter 1997
48 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The second weakness in codes de- scribing environments is that few pro- vide examples of what constitutes a "hostile" or "offensive" environment. Distinction is rarely made between an environment that is generally deemed offensive at the societal level and one which an individual student finds per- sonally offensive, for example, because of religious beliefs. An Anglican stu- dent may perceive as "hostile" a class discussion of the attempts actually made by some British Anglican congre- gations to limit the number of non- Christian books in their local public library. University policies should clarify that an "intellectually discom- forting" classroom is not a "hostile environment," and that the latter term generally applies to such external ele- ments as obscene gestures and displays of obscene material unrelated to course content. Respect Difficulties may also arise with the in- terpretation of the word "respect," which appears frequently in policies. For example: Relations among all persons should be characterized by mutual respect and equality. (Florida State) The University's educational mission is promoted by professionalism in faculty- student relationships, and professional- ism is fostered by an atmosphere of mu- tual trust and respect. (North Carolina, Chapel Hill) All UBC students, staff members, and faculty share responsibility for promot- ing a learning environment of mutual trust and respect. (British Columbia) "Respect" is defined by Webster's 3rd International Dictionary as "high, special, or deferential regard; esteem and honor." Although a laudable qual- ity to uphold, respect (as defined) may be narrowly interpreted to mean respect for the ideas themselves rather than the right to express them. If respect is nar- rowly defined, university codes may hamper effective interaction during an intellectual freedom debate. Respect must exist on various levels within the classroom. Respect for the professor and fellow students as individuals is neces- sary for any discussion. Respect for the rules of the forum (which may include no name-calling, derisory comments, or rais- ing of voices) should be expected, and respect for the right of others to express their views is critical. However, the uni- versity should not require professors and students to show high regard and honor for the ideas of those with whom they disagree. Only in an atmosphere where students can express vigorous disagree- ment is free and open debate about con- troversial ideas fostered. During a "give-and-take" debate, they learn to assign different values to various beliefs and at- titudes while, one hopes, examining their own perceptions about intellectual free- dom issues. The Pratt Institute's Code states that the University "cherish[es] the diver- sity represented by our people, their disparate values and ideas." The state- ment itself is valuable for defending in- tellectual freedom class content but is limited. In this and other codes, pre- scriptions for "respect" should be modi- fied with statements that encourage polite but structured discussion of "dis- parate values and ideas," and also clearly state that while respect for indi- viduals and the rules of debate is ex- pected; respect for ideas is contingent on their merit. Harassment Many policies noted the difficulties with defining "harassment." To clarify the term, some list examples of actions Volume 38, Number 1
Intellectual Freedom Lectures 49 (clearly stating that they are not all-in- clusive) and/or the effects of harass- ment on the victim. Sexual harassment is not easy to define . . . Generally it is unwanted, unwelcome, in- appropriate, or irrelevant sexual or gen- der-based activities or comments . . . Ex- amples are verbal harassment and abuse of a sexual or gender-specific nature; un- necessary touching, leering at or ogling of a person's body. (Florida State) . . . sexual harassment refers to com- ment or conduct of a sexual nature when . . . the conduct is engaged in or the com- ment is made by a person who knows or ought reasonably to know that the con- duct or comment is unwanted or unwel- come. (British Columbia) Whether by comment or action, racial harassment may be blatant or subtle - none of which is condoned by Emporia State University. Some examples of bla- tant racial harassment are: derogatory name calling, comments based on cul- tural stereotypes, or incidents which are derogatory to a racial or ethnic group .... Conduct will be considered harassment when it has the effect of unreasonable interference with an individual's work or academic performance .... (Emporia) Even with these explanations, con- fusion about the acceptability of intel- lectual course content and teaching methodologies occurs. Discussion of censorship issues such as the photo- graphs of Robert Mapplethorpe, the lan- guage in Huckleberry Finn, the illustrations of The Five Chinese Broth- ers, or the theories of Philippe Rushton may indeed be considered unwelcome by some students and ultimately inter- fere with their study concentration. Teaching Intent University policies on discrimination and harassment rarely distinguish the intent of a personal individual sexual action from a faculty member's peda- gogical intent when teaching sexually oriented subjects to a whole class. If a student charges harassment because an "intimidating, hostile, or abusive . . . academic environment" (New York, Queens College) has been created by a class examining controversial sexually explicit materials, the professor's de- fense that the intent was to familiarize students with intellectual freedom is- sues may be weak. Of all the policies examined, only the University of Mary- land's specifically protects potentially offensive teaching materials: Displays of sexually explicit materials in the classroom are allowed if they have a "defensible educational purpose." Brit- ish Columbia's policy alludes to this area more generally by saying that dis- crimination refers only to "treatment for which there is no bona fide and reasonable justification," thereby open- ing the possibility for a pedagogical de- fense. In most policies, however, the "harasser's" intent or lack of intent is not treated as relevant; it is the effect on the victim that is paramount. This [sexual harassment] policy ad- dresses intentional conduct. It also ad- dresses conduct which results in nega- tive effects even though such negative effects were unintended. (Michigan) The University takes the broadest possi- ble view consistent with law and reason regarding conduct encompassed by the phrase "sexual harassment." . . . Regard- less of specific intent, conduct having the characteristics and effect of sexual harass- ment will be so treated. (Florida State) Academic Freedom Statements within Codes Support for teachers of intellectual free- dom content may sometimes be found under the aegis of academic freedom Winter 1997
50 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science statements within codes that regulate actions and speech. These statements generally attempt to distinguish actions associated with the wider scholarly mission of a university from actions subject to harassment and discrimination charges. Including an academic freedom statement in a code dealing with harass- ment/discrimination shows clearly that a university recognizes the potential mis- use of the code to curtail teaching and research. In addition, stating the impor- tance of academic freedom to the univer- sity's mission and defining the parameters of that freedom help to define, by exclu- sion, what constitutes unacceptable speech and teaching technique.16 Unfor- tunately, only the following five of the thirty-three policies examined contain substantive statements in this area within or juxtaposed to the harassment/ discrimi- nation policy. Syracuse University strongly supports and protects the principle of academic freedom. All members of the University community have a right to discuss con- troversial subjects and to express ideas with which some or most of the members of the community strongly disagree. Sex- ual harassment is not about voicing un- popular ideas. (Syracuse) It is not intended to infringe upon con- stitutionally guaranteed rights nor upon academic freedom. (Louisiana) The University also is committed to the principles of free inquiry and expres- sion. Members of the University commu- nity have the right to hold, vigorously defend, and express their ideas and opinions to flourish or wither according to their merits. Respect for this right re- quires that students tolerate expression of views that they find abhorrent. (Texas, Austin) No limitation shall be placed upon the teacher's and librarian's freedom of ex- position of the subject in the classroom, or library, or on the expression of it out- side . . . Respecting students as indi- viduals, the teacher seeks to establish a relationship of mutual trust and adheres to the proper role as intellectual guide and counselor .... The teacher makes every effort to foster honest academic conduct . . . protects their [students'] academic freedom and serves as an ex- ample of the principle by assuring that each student and colleague is free to voice opinions openly and to exchange ideas free from interference. (Indiana) Neither this [discrimination and harass- ment] policy in general, nor its defini- tions in particular, are to be applied in such a way as to detract from the right of faculty, staff, and students to engage in the frank discussion of potentially con- troversial matters, such as age, race, poli- tics, religion, sex, and sexual orienta- tion. These are legitimate topics and no University policy should have the effect of limiting discussion of them or of pro- hibiting instructional techniques, such as the use of irony, the use of conjecture and refutation, or the assignment of readings that advocate controversial po- sitions, provided that such discussion and instructional techniques are con- ducted in a mutually respectful manner. (British Columbia) Recommendations The introduction of new or revised uni- versity policies on sexual and racial harassment/ discrimination and the dif- ficulties experienced by students, pro- fessors, and university administrators in interpreting those policies should alert those who teach controversial and possibly offensive subjects that they may be challenged. Bowdlerizing one's course or merely waving the ALA's or Canadian Library Association's Bill of Volume 38, Number 1
Intellectual Freedom Lectures 51 Rights may be ways of staving off com- plaints. Here are some methods which may also be effective, and are more in- tellectually honest: 1. Preface a course or session that involves controversial topics with a discussion of the advancement of knowledge through open in- quiry so that students understand the importance of free scholarship within the university and, by ex- tension, within that particular class and topic. Thirty years ago, Berninghausen urged library edu- cators not to take for granted that graduate students understand the significance of academic free- dom.17 His admonition is even more important today. 2. Explain clearly the rules of discus- sion: ideas and beliefs may be chal- lenged and disputed, but remarks that denigrate individuals or groups and comments which ridicule opinions will not be tolerated. These rules of conduct may be equated with those expected of a professional librarian on the job. Belittling a customer who wishes to censor an item only exacerbates the problem and never resolves it. 3. Alert in writing those who adminis- ter library and information studies programs and university discrimina- tion and harassment policies that your course content and teaching methodology may disturb or offend some students. Assure them that these are approved topics within the curriculum and that the teach- ing methods, such as case studies, are appropriate. 4. Carefully monitor the forums in which controversial topics are dis- cussed because as the "presiding" professor you are responsible for all classroom speech, not just your own. You are accountable for offen- sive remarks made by one student to another during class debates, so be wary of setting up small-group discussions of controversial topics which you cannot monitor easily. 5. Read your university codes on sex- ual and racial harassment very carefully so that if a student com- plains about feeling uncomfortable, distressed, or harassed by your course content or teaching methods you can inform him/her of his/her rights and procedures. You will also know the level of support to expect if a formal complaint is pur- sued by the student. If teaching controversial and potentially offen- sive topics is protected within uni- versity codes, alert the complainant to this fact. And if the policy does not protect such topics, press for amendments that will do so. Conclusion In proposing his course on intellectual freedom for library and information sci- ence students in 1967, Kister main- tained that "the concepts, principles, definitions, history, methods, and atti- tudes involved are much too subtle and complex for just a yes/no approach."18 Instead, he recommended that students be challenged to examine difficult is- sues likely to discomfit and offend on both an intellectual and emotional level so they could better understand societal views and their own. Only with this teaching methodology did Kister feel that students could attain the course objective: to "evolve an individually satisfying, workable, and coherent per- sonal/professional philosophy con- cerning intellectual freedom."19 His goal remains laudable and relevant for library and information science pro- grams today. To realize it, however, pro- fessors must not be intimidated by Winter 1997
52 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science codes on speech and conduct into Bowdlerizing their lectures so that no one can possibly be offended. The fallout from the aforemen- tioned McEwen report continued in late 1995 as University of British Columbia faculty forums reverberated with accu- sations that professors are being "forced to teach dross" while others maintained that academic freedom is not at issue.20 Hopefully the crises UBC and other uni- versities face in this area may prove in the long run to be opportunities for fac- ulty and students to debate more calmly the questions of broadened access - not only who has access to education and information, but also to what informa- tion.21 It may be an opportunity to reas- sert within the curriculum the value of diversity of opinion (however person- ally offensive) and by extension, diver- sity of library collections and staffing. Instead of pruning potentially offensive course content, those who teach contro- versial topics may be able to extricate themselves from the defensive postures into which many of us have been twisted in this last decade, and assume the task of our jobs: to enrich the debate, rather than allow it to be defined by other peoples' single-issue agendas. References and Notes 1. Kenneth Kister, "A Unique Course on In- tellectual Freedom and Censorship," chapter 55 in Book Selection and Censor- ship in the Sixties (New York: Bowker, 1969), 395-415. 2. Joan Wallach Scott, "The Campaign Against Political Correctness: What's Re- ally at Stake," chapter 3 in PC Wars: Poli- tics and Theory in the Academy (New York: Routledge, 1995), 22-43. 3. Joan I. McEwen, Report in Respect of the Political Science Department of the Uni- versity of British Columbia, June 15, 1995, Vancouver. 4. Noel Perrin, Dr. Bowdler's Legacy: A His- tory of Expurgated Books in England and America (New York: Atheneum, 1969). 5. The question was posed to the author by several attending faculty members. 6. David K. Berninghausen, "Teaching a Commitment to Intellectual Freedom," chapter 54 in Book Selection and Censor- ship in the Sixties (New York: R.R. Bowker, 1969), 385. 7. Kenneth Kister, "A Unique Course," 395- 96. 8. Bruce Shuman, Intellectual Freedom Courses in Graduate Library Schools," Journal of Education for Librarianship 18 (Summer 1977): 99-109. 9. Diana Woodward, "A Framework for De- ciding Issues in Ethics," Library Trends 39 (Summer/Fall 1990): 8-17. 10. Herbert S. White, "Teaching Professional Ethics to Students of Library and Infor- mation Science," in Ethics and the Li- brarian (Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, 1991), 31-43. 11. Paul Lauter, "'Political Correctness* and the Attack on American Colleges," in Higher Education Under Fire: Politics, Economics, and the Crisis of the Humani- ties (New York: RouÜedge, 1995), 82; Marilyn Friedman, "Codes, Canons, Cor- rectness, and Feminism," in Political Correctness: For and Against (Lanham, Maryland: Rowan & Uttlefield, 1995), 1- 45. 12. Melanie Phillips, "Illiberal Liberalism," in The War of the Words: The Political Correctness Debate (London: Virago, 1994), 35-54; Jan Narveson, "Politics, Ethics, and Political Correctness," in Po- litical Correctness: For and Against (Lan- ham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995), 47-106; Robert Hughes, Culture of Complaint: The Fraying of America (New York: Warner Books, 1993). 13. Phillips, "Illiberal Liberalismi 54. 14. Kister, "A Unique Course," 398. 15. White, "Teaching Professional Ethics," 41. 16. The "Sexual Harassment Guidelines" of Harvard Law School, implemented in October 1995, are very clear on this mat- ter: they expressly forbid censorship of speech which is "reasonably designed or intended to contribute to legal or pub- Volume 38. Number 1
Intellectual Freedom Lectures 53 lie education, academic inquiry, or rea- soned debate on issues of public con- cern." Critics have charged, however, that despite this clarity, the guidelines create a repressive learning atmosphere in the university's attempt to act in loco parentis. Harvey A. Silvergate, "Harvard Law Caves In to the Censors," Wall Street Journal, January 8, 1996; "Free Speech and Sexual Harassment" (letters to the editor), Wall Street Journal, January 19, 1996. 17. Berninghausen, "Teaching a Commit- ment," 387. 18. Kister, "A Unique Course," 399. 19. Ibid. 20. Comments on the McEwen Report and national reaction to it are available in various issues of The Globe and Mail: "University Closes Faculty over Harass- ment Charges," June 22, 1995; "UBC's Brush with Political Correctness," June 23, 1995; "Sex-Harassment Codes Pro- duce Chilly Climate on Campus," July 1, 1995; "A Little Common Sense at UBC," July 15, 1995; "Academics Should Be- ware of the New Gatekeepers," Septem- ber 11, 1995. 21. Gerald Graff, Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conflicts Can Revital- ize American Education (New York: Nor- ton, 1992). Winter 1997