IAlternatives to Apathy and Indifference: Civic Education in Public Libraries Jenny S. Bossaller ABSTRACT Public libraries depend on public support for their existence. This essay asks, What can and should public librarians do to contribute to civic education? It discusses librarianship, politics and neu- trality, and funding. It looks to public statements of librarians in the immediate aftermath of the election, then turns back to what librarians were doing in the realm of civic participation and education immediately prior to the election. Evidence comes from popular articles, tweets focus- ing on libraries and the election, and an unscientific, post hoc survey of library event calendars. Recommendations include fostering communication and dialogue and participating in actions that foster truth and democracy. n late 2016, the newspaper Enid News & Eagle, of Enid, OK, endorsed Hillary Clinton for pres- ident. The newspaper subsequently lost 162 subscribers and 11 advertisers. Other right- wing newspapers endorsed Clinton with similar backlash, including the Arizona Republic in Phoenix, whose owner “received death threats after it endorsed a Democrat for president for the first time in its 126-year history” (Fernandez 2016). Like newspapers, libraries are rooted in their local communities, and they are information providers. Librarians build and curate library collections and programs for their constituencies. Libraries are supported by taxes, though, not by subscribers; they are owned by the public, not by a private company. Both li- braries and the media gain legitimacy through the idea that they support democracy by in- forming citizens (Schiller 1996; Kranich 2001). Both librarians and journalists are staunch ad- vocates of intellectual freedom and the First Amendment as tenets of democracy. Libraries, however, are physical spaces—an idea we will return to later. The 2016 elections were definitely monumental. By the time this issue of Library Quarterly comes out, the first 100 days will have passed, but as I write, many of us are still wondering, What happened? Not only did the presidential election surprise much of the country, but the balance of power shifted in strong favor of the Republican Party in both the House and the Senate. Voters in many parts of the country were surprised because they expected a differentLibrary Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 195–210. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8703-0002$10.00 195
196 • The Library Quarterlyoutcome. The political division in the country has been stark, and it has been framed in terms of education, rural versus urban, coastal versus inland, and so on. The democratic process was questioned throughout the election, with Donald Trump threatening to challenge the results of the election should he lose, citing faulty technology, fraudulent votes, and a biased press. In the end, it might have been fake news and hacking of the Democratic National Commit- tee server that tipped the votes in favor of Trump. These problems with democracy are infor- mation problems and thus are highly interesting and problematic for both librarians and the media. This essay runs the gamut of discussing librarianship, politics, funding, information, and education. It turns to the immediate public reaction of librarians on Twitter in relation to the election. It then turns back to what librarians were doing in the realm of civic participation and education immediately prior to the election. Finally, it examines what public libraries can and should do regarding civic education, returning to the case of the newspaper. The sources of evidence are popular articles, tweets focusing on libraries and the election, and an unscien- tific, post hoc survey of library event calendars. Libraries and Politics Michael Gorman’s (2000) Our Enduring Values and the principles from the American Library As- sociation’s (ALA’s) Code of Ethics (ALA 2008) identify several values that speak directly to pol- itics: intellectual freedom, respect for intellectual property rights, patron privacy, equity of access, and a commitment to democracy. Commitments to literacy and learning and the re- moval of self-interest also speak to a political interest in equality and truth of representation. At face value, the values are fairly innocuous. However, they are definitely (and now, defiantly) aligned with a political agenda in favor of the public good. If librarians uphold the stated val- ues, then they will be participating in acts that affect the polis, and if they discuss why they do those acts and advocate for them, they are participating in politics. There are other ways in which librarians are bounded by politics, so to speak. Libraries serve people within specific po- litical boundaries and often are part of the governmental structure of a city. If the political cli- mate or dominant values clash with professional ethics and values, dissonance might occur (as might happen when librarians serve homeless people or develop diverse collections). The ALA itself is an organization that makes political statements, and the ALA Washington Office is its center of advocacy. It advocates for funding for libraries so that librarians can carry out its mission. The announcement of Emily Sheketoff’s retirement is testimony to the asso- ciation’s political action, which includes advocacy for libraries, fighting against provisions in the USA PATRIOT Act that compromised the privacy of library patrons, working to get librar- ies included as beneficiaries of federal workforce funding, ensuring school libraries were part of the 2015 Every Student Succeeds Act, expanding the Library Services and Technology Act and “E-Rate” program, creating a lobbying day on Capitol Hill, and working to install Carla
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 197Hayden (a librarian!) as the Librarian of Congress: “In 2016, for the second year in a row, the Hill announced that ALA was one of the Top Ten Most Effective Lobbying Groups because of the ALA’s efforts around FOIA [the Freedom of Information Act]” (ALA 2017a). The ALA’s (2011) Key Message 1 in the document “Keeping Public Libraries Public” proclaims, “There are cer- tain community services that should be held by the public. Libraries are one of them” (3). Pub- lic libraries are accountable to the citizenry and to the Freedom of Information Act and are governed in public, open meetings. This is definitely a political idea, although it should not be divisive in a free, democratic society. Is librarianship itself political? Joeckel said in 1935 that the library board’s job is to keep the public library “out of politics . . . library personnel has, in general, been kept free from the more serious influences of local and national partisanship” (248). It is safe to say that most libraries (not librarians) today still stay out of politics. In fact, much of the everyday work that librarians do is not political; it is mundane—fixing printers, helping people format résumés and footnotes, calling the plumber (or being a plumber), finding books and articles to help students write papers, putting together programs for summer reading. Collection and pro- gram development, participation in literacy coalitions, and other acts can be political. Librarians are people, not automatons. They read a lot about local, national, and world events—or they should, if they are doing their jobs—and for better or worse, reading a lot tends to produce opinions about what is good and what is not good. Librarians help people find whatever information they are looking for, even if it is personally distasteful but not if it is wrong (although making that judgment call can be problematic). They learn to separate self from work, striving to maintain neutrality—in collection development and at the reference desk (see Jaeger et al. [2013] for an excellent critique of library neutrality). They create pro- grams that cater to the needs of their communities. It is part of the job—it is #whatlibrariansdo. Librarians also experience tension in retaining politically neutral spaces. They are taught about the concept of neutrality in collection development in school. It can be difficult to create spaces where all people feel welcomed and valued, especially during highly politically charged seasons or during times of social unrest. Furthermore, librarians are by no means all liberal or Democrats, although public librarians usually do lean to the left through ideas like inclusivity and public funding for social services. However, it is safer to leave partisan politics at the door to maintain workplace civility. A blog post titled “The ALA Knows It Is Liberal and Losing Members Who Are ‘Disgusted with the National Organization’; Refugees Reach Out to SafeLibraries” (Klineman 2008) offers a contentious case in point. On the darker side, librarians sometimes experience political pressure, however subtle. Li- brarianship is an information profession and is potentially subject to the same criticism of bias that the media receive (Schiller 1996; McChesney 2004). Beyond bias, though, libraries are agents that promote access for all and that exist only because people are willing to invest in them, demonstrating widespread acceptance of the public good. Librarians are aware of their
198 • The Library Quarterlyprecarious funding, and if a librarian wants to pursue a social justice mission by supporting a cause (e.g., Black Lives Matter), he or she might decide against it to avoid being criticized or punished by its detractors. This is a practice of risk avoidance that refrains from alienating seg- ments of the community (although those who do so might be entering “the hottest place in hell”1). Even the term “social justice” can be problematic. Glenn Beck (2016), standard bearer of the conservative movement, equated social justice with socialism, Marxism, and the “forced redistribution of wealth.” This is pretty close to the argument that was used when the United States supported South African Apartheid (Elliot 2011) and conservatives’ disavowal of the Civil Rights Act (Hall 2005), which banned employment discrimination. Librarians who frame their work as political, who call for equal access to information, and who actively collect items on social causes or pursue alliances with nondominant groups in the community are opening themselves up to criticism. In the face of a rising and staunchly right-wing government and a bleak outlook for publicly funded programs, it is not unreason- able for them to try to fly under the radar. However, as Jaeger et al. (2013) said, libraries’ neu- trality or “intentional distancing from the political process” has kept the public library “out- side the political and policy-making process” (369). If librarians want the public library to be considered a vital community resource, they are going to have to be actively engaged with the issues that affect their patrons. Librarians (among other professionals) are usually driven by a sense of a higher calling. As- suming that they do their homework before entering the profession, they have not entered it for high wages. Rather, they want to make the world a better place, which they do through programs, collections, and the facilitation of conversations (Lankes 2011). Durrani and Small- wood (2008) explained the social justice mission in collection development: public libraries can help people investigate how the world works. They are places where people can obtain not only bestselling books but also a wide swath of materials from small publishers, and es- pecially materials that are controversial. “The key issue,” Durrani and Smallwood write, “is to decide what the social role of librarians is. Should they take the social, economic, and po- litical situation they find themselves in as a given without understanding why and how we arrived at this situation? Is it their role to dig deeper into ‘facts’ that are given to them by their social environment?” (120). Similarly, Iverson (2008) said, “If we accept that information is connected to knowledge and knowledge to power, we must examine the connections between power and information in our postmodern society” (29). The real work of librarians is, indeed, deeply political in both collection development and programmatic efforts. Teaching information-literacy classes is po-1. John F. Kennedy, as a young senator, said, “The hottest places in hell are reserved for those who in times of moral crisis preserve their neutrality,” although there is debate about the exact origin of the phrase. Joseph Good (2008) ex- plains it in terms of librarianship.
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 199litical. When librarians serve incarcerated people and take bookmobiles to low-income hous- ing, they are upholding values of equal access. Workforce and literacy development, early childhood literacy programming, computer classes, summer reading programs, and access to health and Medicare programming all have the purpose of improving access to reading and providing information about issues and social programs that can improve people’s lives. This is political work, but it is also just #whatlibrariansdo. It is unclear as of yet where Donald Trump himself stands regarding libraries; he claims to support bolstering the American infrastructure, but cabinet nominees such as Betsy DeVos have been staunch supporters of privatizing public assets. The National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts might be on the chopping block should he follow the Heritage Foundation’s (2016) recommendations outlined in the “Blueprint for Balance: A Federal Budget for 2017.” The ALA’s Libraries Transform initiative reminds peo- ple (i.e., voters and policy makers) that libraries are essential public services “because a library card is the most important school supply of all” and “because librarians know information is the best medicine for healthcare questions” (ALA, 2015). Whether a new administration will consider them to be an essential part of the infrastructure has yet to be determined. When the ALA office offered a hand to the Trump team, it seemed to be asserting or reminding the new administration that libraries are essential and helpful to all people, regardless of political affil- iation. They are a good value for all, including the incoming administration. Reaction to the Election Many hashtags were used during the 2016 election—in fact, USA Today proclaimed, “Election’s Big Winner Was Twitter” (Guynn 2016). Three hashtags that librarians used in direct response to the election were #LibrariesRespond, #LibrariesTransform, and #notmyALA (there are doubt- less many others; e.g., #critlib offered insight into the intersection of fake news and the elec- tion). The first two are officially used and endorsed, created by the ALA to demonstrate the value of libraries. The third was created as a direct response to the ALA’s offer to help the in- coming administration. It seems that the #LibrariesRespond hashtag was created in 2015 in response to the tragic shooting in the Charleston Mother Emanuel Church. It was a way to show how libraries were responding to community distress—with programming, safe spaces, and book displays. The next year, it was used in response to the Black Lives Matter movement and natural disasters. In November 2016, it was used in response to the elections. We can assume that it was used again, based on previous use, because of the distress that the elections caused in many com- munities. Libraries, as told by the ALA, were prepared to respond (a) as a resource to the in- coming administration (Libraries Bolster Opportunities, an offer that elicited an immediate backlash from the wider librarian community) and (b) as a community resource, “a place to
200 • The Library Quarterlyfind credible information sources AND to seek common ground” and “because libraries in- spire understanding and community healing” (ALA, 2015). The alignment with the political left did not go unnoticed. In a 2016 Twitter post, Satan Librarian (@SatanLibrarian) pointed out, “The ALA #LibrariesRespond hashtag sounds a lot like #SLhatesTrump but a bit more diplomatic . . . anyway, have at it!” #LibrariesRespond also might be read as an indicator of an internal war between the officially endorsed line (“We are here to help”) and the line many librarians were expressing (“The new administration is an oppressor, and we will show soli- darity with protesters”). The hashtag also intersects with two other main topics: fake news and information literacy (libraries respond with the truth) and cybersecurity (libraries fight government cybersnooping). #LibrariesTransform is the official hashtag for the ALA and was launched by the ALA on October 29, 2015 (well in advance of the election). As with many previous ALA campaigns, it stressed the relevance and necessity of the library for education, information, and democ- racy. Librarians tweeted about activities as diverse as innovation and maker spaces (preparing for the future), disability awareness, new libraries, and generally how awesome libraries and librarians are. However, the hashtag was also used extensively after the election, almost in- terchangeably with #LibrariesRespond. There were also several instances when the hashtag was used to spread the word about libraries that received additional funding in the elections. Hashtags such as #LibrariesTransform and #LibrariesRespond show how people conceive of a particular idea or purpose. A hashtag can help organize people and movements, but it also can show the different sides of an event. These hashtags were created as part of an official campaign, endorsed by the ALA, but they are available for use by anyone who chooses to use them. The main idea behind #LibrariesRespond is that libraries offer solidarity and safe spaces for the oppressed or help in times of trouble. This does not tell the whole story; related hashtags tell different stories on Twitter, and there are librarians who are transforming or re- sponding who never post their events on Twitter. One thing that we can be sure of, though, is that both hashtags were used to express dismay about political events after the election. The Public Library Association (2017) has put together a web page of postelection resources for “its members and their libraries” who “may be struggling to respond to post-election chal- lenges our communities face,” explaining, “Public libraries have an unparalleled ability to bring people and knowledge together, especially in times of uncertainty and division. . . . As we invite our communities to have critical conversations, we must be committed to ensur- ing a safe place for all that reflects and serves the diversity of our nation. PLA offers the re- sources below to help its members serve their communities.” Its parent organization, the ALA (2017b), states, “We ask all library workers to help us continue to bring visibility to the work we do together to show up in the face of racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia, and all forms of bigotry and oppression as we pursue our mission. The library is a place where patrons learn more about the issues at stake from credible sources, learn history, find quality books,
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 201take advantage of community resources, utilize safe spaces, organize, and engage in self-care as they confront another difficult period.” Yes, this was a difficult period for many communities; the marches and protests in many cities immediately following the election testify to the distress brought on by the unexpected outcome. The marches around the globe after the inauguration confirm a pervasive and wide- spread need to show resistance. However, there is likely another motivation for librarians’ re- sponse: the new administration could be a very real threat to libraries. Librarians depend on the public coffers for their existence. An administration that is hostile toward public funding could deeply affect their work. The #NotMyALA hashtag was a response to a perception that the ALA was normalizing the incoming administration, along with the misogyny, racism, and nastiness that regularly stunned the news-reading populace. There is also an underlying fear that the new administra- tion will cut funding for public entities, disabling their work in pursuit of the public good— limiting or eliminating story times, job-readiness workshops, computer programming, and GED classes, not to mention books and electronic resources. Backpedaling: What Were Librarians Doing before the Election? The national election was certainly distressing for many people; it has been cited as a sign of exactly how divided our nation is. Libraries, though, are inherently local—they respond to their communities’ needs. In an effort to remain open to all, they do not engage in partisan political activity (return to Joeckel’s 1935 quote; this is nothing new). Many of the tweets men- tioned were about service to communities rather than expressions against any political party or person. The ALA is the official, national voice and lobbying arm for libraries and librarians. When the ALA Washington Office offered help to the incoming administration, librarians around the country expressed disgust, withdrawing their membership and tweeting with the hashtag #notmyALA, mimicking the hashtag #notmypresident. They felt that their national voice had betrayed them personally and the profession more generally. If libraries are vital to democracy, what were librarians doing to advance civic education before the election? Were efforts focused on national or local issues? Were they a force edu- cating for democracy? The EveryLibrary (2015) initiative, for instance, encouraged librarians to participate in National Voter Registration Day: “Imagine if all your library’s users were regis- tered voters? Well, on September 22nd, 2015, librarians have a great opportunity to offer a ‘pro- gram’ to register voters on site complete with volunteers and marketing. A large number of libraries around the country will be participating in the event because it is so easy and cheap to participate but we want every library to join in.” That is a specifically nonpartisan event. A Google search for “libraries and election” did not find any interesting results. The New York Public Library has a page of election happenings,
202 • The Library Quarterlybut the page features more books, feature films, documentaries, music, and spoken arts about civics, voting, gerrymandering, insider politics, and other topics than information about events (Quammie 2016). The library hosted an election film festival and streamed the debates (a good thing for democracy because cable or streaming Internet service was required to watch them). To gain a broader view of what was going on in libraries across the country immediately prior to the election, I randomly selected 50 public libraries’ event calendars (one from each state) from October 1 to November 8, 2016. I was originally looking specifically for civic, voter, or government events, such as talks or debates, but there are caveats: although this selection did include every state in the union, it was not a scientific sample, and although numbers and percentages are unreported, the findings are informative. After looking over several calendars and thinking about the purpose of this essay, I de- cided to widen the scope of events that might be considered political, including events such as Medicare programs and multilanguage or English as a second language (ESL) story times. Such events seek to connect people (especially the disenfranchised) to books and information that they would otherwise be denied. It is impossible to know what went on in any library program without being there; many seemingly innocuous programs might have turned into politically charged or enlightening events. The most commonly noted civically minded programs were ESL classes and conversation groups, multilanguage story times, financial aid programs for college, small-business support programs, Medicare and health programs, Affordable Care Act outreach with social service agencies and other community support programs, and résumé and job-hunting programs. Free legal help (including legal advice for recently released prisoners) and adult education clas- ses and tutoring were also fairly common. Many libraries provided meeting space for groups that might be quite controversial (e.g., a prochoice coalition), but the groups were only using the meeting space. Several reading and film events were presumably designed to facilitate civic education di- alogue as well. These included readings of such books as Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City (in Madison, Wisconsin), The Underground Girls of Kabul (in Flagstaff, Arizona), Just Mercy (in Fayetteville, Arkansas), and Democracy in America (in Lawrence, Kansas). There was one play as well: Save the Country by Allyson Adams (in Bozeman, Montana). Several libraries hosted screen- ings of movies, including Osama (in Flagstaff), The Raising of America (in Ames, Iowa), Red Light Green Light (a film about sex trafficking, hosted in St. Paul, Minnesota), and a domestic vio- lence awareness film (in Las Vegas, Nevada). The St. Paul Public Library hosts a Theater of Pub- lic Policy (2017) in which “policy makers and local leaders discuss the hot issues of the day. Then, in real time, the cast re-imagines the debate through the spontaneity of unscripted the- ater, making policy fun.” Several libraries hosted storytelling workshops and poetry and music events that focused on geographic areas such as Palestine and Cuba; others hosted election debate-watching par-
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 203ties followed by dialogue. The Dallas (TX) Public Library hosted a congressman’s mobile-office program to increase accessibility to the public, and the program “Conversations with a Cop” was scheduled in many libraries. These are inclusive, nonpartisan events designed to connect people with their elected officials or to increase trust and accountability in government. Some notably different programs are also worth mentioning2: • Dothan, Alabama: Alabamian Supreme Court Justices Lecture Series, highlighting the role of the court in rights and social issues: “Campbell’s legacy lay in a theory of consti- tutional interpretation that continues to find its way into some of our most contentious social issues; and Hugo Black’s impact is felt every time any American citizen raises ques- tions about fundamental rights” (Dothan-Houston County Library System 2016) • Dover, Delaware: Dover Public Library Great Decisions Group discussion series on the United Nations and Cuba (Foreign Policy Association 2016) • Ames, Iowa: Fall author series including “Women in Political Campaigns,” an event pre- paring for Gloria Steinem’s visit to Ames (Ames Public Library Friends Foundation 2016) • Lawrence, Kansas: Programs about fair housing, race and culture, and open access (Law- rence Public Library 2016a, 2016b, 2016c) • Louisville, Kentucky: “Government, Civics, and Citizenship Short Course” on politics and government: “With the presidential election just around the corner, the inner workings of our government are in the spotlight. Study up with this informative and topical look into our federal government―from its philosophical foundations and structure to the basics of constitutional law and legislation, and on to party politics, polling, and the in- fluence of the media” (Louisville Free Public Library 2016) • Bangor, Maine: The Bangor Public Library hosted a series of events to provide public ac- cess to congressional offices • Baltimore, Maryland: The Baltimore County Public Library’s “Voices in Government” se- ries, including “How Government Size Matters” and “Media in Politics” • Boston, Massachusetts: “Election and Voting Resources” class at the Boston Public Library • St. Charles, Missouri: “Know Your Government!” (St. Charles City-County Library District 2016): “With the election coming up, have you ever wondered, ‘How does our govern- ment really work?’” (12). A political science professor and political analyst led a discussion on “the role of government, how it functions, and the need to understand it” (12). • Las Vegas, Nevada: “Education and Political Discussion” in which a “bipartisan education caucus presents and education and political discussion” (Las Vegas-Clark County Library 2016)2. Program information was collected from library websites, which are subject to change. Some information may no longer be available.
204 • The Library Quarterly• Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: “Civics for Grown-Ups: ‘Hot Topics’” events on voting rights, immigrant rights, and freedom of the press (Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh 2016a, 2016b, 2016c) • Charleston, South Carolina: Programs at the Charleston County Public Library about hip- hop and race relations and about the rise of ISIS and the Sunni–Shiite schism • Memphis, Tennessee: Great Conversations series with topics including bioengineering, and a reenactment of the Revolutionary War, focusing on Thomas Paine (Memphis Pub- lic Libraries 2016) • Chesapeake, Virginia: Political Pundits Book Club: “Read books across the political spec- trum/diverse viewpoints encouraged” (Chesapeake Public Library 2016) • Clarksburg-Harrison County, West Virginia: “Election Information to Help You Decide” at the Clarksburg Harrison Public Library (2016): “No conversation, no hassle, just infor- mation.” • Jackson, Wyoming: Candidate forum on the Teton County Conservation District and School District Board and a 1% general sales tax (Teton County Library 2016) Although the calendar for the Hartford (CT) Public Library was inaccessible, its Institute of Museum and Library Services–funded program “We Belong Here” must be mentioned. Its goal is to promote immigrant civic involvement rooted in the concept of “building net- works of trusting relationships between immigrants and the receiving community” (Hartford Public Library 2017). This program trains volunteers to serve as cultural navigators, serving to ease new immigrants into community life; builds coalitions through an immigrant advisory group; and engages immigrants and the community in “Community Dialogues” programs and book discussions. This is, without a doubt, only a small portion of the events that were held across the coun- try to prepare citizens to think about and to participate in the democratic process. Many cal- endars’ past events were not accessible, and some calendars were difficult to use for the pur- pose of analysis (although I am sure that they were fine for people who wanted to use them for their intended purpose). That said, there also were several states for which I was unable to locate any remotely political civic events in the library, even after searching several library calendars. Conclusions: The Way Forward On January 26, 2016, the Economist Intelligence Unit downgraded the United States from a full democracy to a “flawed” democracy because of a lack of trust in political institutions. This trend began prior to the election, so the recent election is a product of recent trends: “The US president, Donald Trump, is not to blame for this decline in trust . . . but he was the ben-
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 205eficiary of it” (Economist Intelligence Unit 2017, 4). This grading is based on five categories: electoral process and pluralism, civil liberties, the functioning of government, political partic- ipation, and political culture. Is there any way that libraries might help rebuild trust in our government and a healthy democracy? Let’s return to the Enid News & Eagle. When the newspaper lost its subscribers, it was bailed out by out-of-state subscribers: “After an article in The New York Times described the lingering controversy in Enid over the endorsement, supporters of Mrs. Clinton from around the coun- try called the paper, buying digital subscriptions to EnidNews.com and urging others to do so on Facebook and Twitter” (Fernandez 2017). Small newspapers are inherently local. The out-of-state subscribers will certainly not main- tain their subscriptions for the long haul. Some of the subscriptions were gifts to local schools, but others were not, and people outside of Oklahoma (unless they are from there) doubtless are not terribly interested in the Enid news. Will the newspaper fold because it supported Clinton? If the newspaper had focused on issues rather than endorsing a specific candidate, would the consequences have been different? Like newspapers, libraries are information providers. People discuss newspapers around the dinner table and at the barber shop. However, the intentionally maintained public spaces of libraries can be leveraged to foster face-to-face interaction. This is what makes libraries spe- cial and worthy of public support: they do not simply supply information but also foster civic education and intercultural understanding. Like newspapers, libraries can seek national sup- port through groups such as EveryLibrary, but ultimately, they too must rely on local support. Likewise, the ALA exists to support libraries and librarians at the national level. I would like to think that the ALA’s immediate response (“Let’s work with the incoming adminis- tration”) that so infuriated members was a calculated response—an olive branch—to what is likely to be a fiscally hostile incoming administration. Similar to the Libraries Transform campaign, it was a way to assert the necessity of librarians, to say, “We can help you.” It was probably a stealthy, pragmatic move rather than one that sought to align its members with Donald Trump. Pragmatism should not compromise values, though, and the ALA pub- licly apologized to members when they tweeted angrily that they were canceling their mem- berships. It is hard to imagine that any public library would ever make a public statement in favor of a specific candidate. As the ALA (2008) Code of Ethics states in statement VII, librarians should “distinguish between personal convictions and professional duties,” not allowing per- sonal feelings to interfere with access to information. This is not the same as neutrality; as Good (2008) said, when a librarian truly gives equal weight to any idea, it is akin to moral rel- ativism. The idea that some people are less equal than others or should have less access to information than others is simply against the values of librarians. People are able to speak their
206 • The Library Quarterlyminds in the public library, within reason—that is, they cannot yell or intimidate people, but it is a space for the free exchange of ideas. If librarians were to create a hostile or unwelcoming space for people who support ideas, or political candidates, that is indeed a problem. What can librarians do, politically, within the space of the library? They must maintain a space where everyone is welcome, but this does not mean that they must avoid politics. In- stead, they should advocate for issues that concern their citizens, at every level of government. Although they might feel that it is dangerous, librarians should advocate for public funding for education, social services, and libraries. Social services were created to give people equal access to the jobs, health care, citizenship, and other things that they need to participate in society. Librarians should advocate for patron privacy, fight censorship, and fight for net neutrality. Burgess (2016) made this distinction: librarians are not advocating for their own personal in- terests but for the aims of their institutions or for the profession. Referring to Preer (2008), Burgess explained, “LIS professionals are encouraged to educate the members of their govern- ing bodies [e.g., their board] on LIS values, including library neutrality and intellectual free- dom” (Burgess 2016, 10), but librarians do not need to be neutral in terms of the public good. Some ways that they can do this are by: • Maintaining a place at the table in state and local governments • Participating in coalitions that advocate for the public good • Producing educational materials about local and national political issues • Holding educational events about political issues • Holding events, such as Human Library events, that foster intercultural or interpersonal understanding • Archiving government data and web pages that are at risk of being lost in times of po- litical change (Schlanger 2017) • Supporting critical information literacy actions, fighting fake news, and advocating for intellectual freedom Robert Hutchins said, “The death of democracy is not likely to be an assassination from ambush. It will be a slow extinction from apathy, indifference, and undernourishment” (as quoted in Stack and Waterson 2013, 199). Jaeger et al. (2013) asserted that libraries themselves are disengaged with the political process, which “not only has consequences for libraries but also limits the attention paid to library-generated perspectives on, and solutions to, issues of policy” (373). They should respond to community needs in times of trouble, but it is more im- portant to respond before the election. The philosophical basis for these actions is values, as embodied in the ALA’s (2008) Code of Ethics, which was written in response to the threatened democracy of World War I. If librar- ians are called militant and radical, they should remember what is at stake—democracy—and
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 207the way that we can make the biggest difference in our communities is by facilitating civic dialogue through diverse collections and programming. This study looked at a very short window of time immediately before the 2016 election. This was out of necessity regarding time and practicality, but it lays the groundwork for a fu- ture study that looks at library programming for civics in the years leading up to the next elec- tion. Of particular interest is the intersection of libraries with local and state politics and librar- ies’ political placement within their cities. Further questions include: • Does the administrative structure and political placement of the library within the com- munity or where it gets its funding affect librarians’ willingness to participate in political action? • Do political affiliations within a community affect the types of programs that a library holds? • Does a library board’s political orientation affect the library’s public action? When librar- ians actively educate the board, do they receive more support for intellectual freedom and civic education? While the posttruth world seems to be thriving in media (especially online media), librar- ies exist for the public, in the face-to-face environment. Librarians can and should capitalize on the truth that can be fostered through dialogue, combating apathy and indifference and nourishing civic education.References ALA (American Library Association). 2008. “Code of Ethics of the American Library Association.” http:// www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics. ALA (American Library Association). 2011. “Keeping Public Libraries Public: A Checklist for Communities Considering Privatization of Public Libraries.” ALA Office for Library Advocacy. http://www.ala.org /tools/sites/ala.org.tools/files/content/outsourcing/REVISEDSEPT2011_ALAKeepingPublicLibraries %20PublicFINAL2.pdf. ALA (American Library Association). 2015. “The Libraries Transform Campaign.” http://www.ilovelibraries .org/librariestransform/. ALA (American Library Association). 2017a. “Emily Sheketoff Announces Retirement after More than 17 Years Leading ALA’s Washington Office.” ALA News, January 12. http://www.ala.org/news/press -releases/2017/01/emily-sheketoff-announces-retirement-after-more-17-years-leading-ala-s. ALA (American Library Association). 2017b. “Libraries Respond: 2016 Election.” http://www.ala.org/advocacy /diversity/libraries-respond/2016election. Ames Public Library Friends Foundation. 2016. Page One. Newsletter, October. http://www.amespublic library.org/Docs_PDFs/PageOne/2016/PageOneOctober2016-web.pdf. Beck, Glenn. 2016. “What Is ‘Social Justice’?” GlennBeck.com. http://www.glennbeck.com/content/articles /article/198/38320/?utm_source5glennbeck&utm_medium5contentcopy_link.
208 • The Library QuarterlyBurgess, John T. F. 2016. “Reconciling Social Responsibility and Neutrality in LIS Professional Ethics: A Vir- tue Ethics Approach.” In Information Cultures in the Digital Age, edited by Matthew Kelly and Jared Bielby. Wiesbaden: Springer. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. 2016a. “Civics for Grown-Ups ‘Hot Topics’: Can You Vote?” Event, Octo- ber 6. http://www.carnegielibrary.org/event/civics-grown-ups-hot-topics-can-vote/. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. 2016b. “Civics for Grown-Ups ‘Hot Topics’: Freedom of the Press.” Event, October 20. http://www.carnegielibrary.org/event/civics-grown-ups-hot-topics-freedom-press/. Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. 2016c. “Civics for Grown-Ups ‘Hot Topics’: Immigrant Rights.” Event, Oc- tober 13. https://www.carnegielibrary.org/event/civics-grown-ups-hot-topics-immigrant-rights/. Chesapeake Public Library. 2016. “IR: Political Pundits Book Club.” https://events.infopeake.org/event/ir -political-pundits-book-club-5/. Clarksburg Harrison Public Library. 2016. “Election Information to Help You Decide.” Event, November 5. http://www.clarksburglibrary.info/events. Dothan-Houston County Library System. 2016. “Alabamian Supreme Court Justices Lecture.” Event, Octo- ber 29. http://dhcls.evanced.info/signup/EventDetails?EventIdp9531&backTopCalendar&startDate p2016/10/01 Durrani, Shiraz, and Elizabeth Smallwood. 2008. “The Professional Is Political: Redefining the Social Role of Public Libraries.” Questioning Library Neutrality: Essays from Progressive Librarian, edited by Alison Lewis. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice. Economist Intelligence Unit. 2017. Democracy Index 2016: Revenge of the “Deplorables.” Report. London: Econ- omist Intelligence Unit. http://pages.eiu.com/rs/783-XMC-194/images/Democracy_Index_2016.pdf. Elliot, Justin. 2011. “Reagan’s Embrace of Apartheid South Africa.” Salon, February 5. http://www.salon .com/2011/02/05/ronald_reagan_apartheid_south_africa/. EveryLibrary. 2015. “Get Your Library Involved in National Voter Registration Day (Sept 22).” EveryLibrary .org, July 20. http://everylibrary.org/get-library-involved-national-voter-registration-day-sept-22/. Fernandez, Manny. 2016. “An Oklahoma Newspaper Endorsed Clinton: It Hasn’t Been Forgiven.” New York Times, December 26. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/26/us/oklahoma-newspaper-hillary-clinton -endorsement.html. Fernandez, Manny. 2017. “One Backlash Spawns Another for Oklahoma Paper That Backed Clinton.” New York Times, January 3. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/03/us/oklahoma-paper-the-enid-news-eagle .html. Foreign Policy Association. 2016. “Dover Public Library Great Decisions Group.” http://www.fpa.org/great _decisions/index.cfm?actpgd_group&group_idp1618713. Good, Joseph. 2008. “The Hottest Place in Hell: The Crisis of Neutrality in Contemporary Librarianship.” Questioning Library Neutrality: Essays from Progressive Librarian, edited by Alison Lewis. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice. Gorman, Michael. 2000. Our Enduring Values: Librarianship in the 21st Century. Chicago: American Library As- sociation. Guynn, Jessica. 2016. “Forget Trump: Election’s Big Winner Was Twitter.” USA Today, November 8. http:// www.usatoday.com/story/tech/news/2016/11/08/election-winner-twitter/93509896/. Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. 2005. “The Long Civil Rights Movement and the Political Uses of the Past.” Journal of American History 91 (4): 1233–63. Hartford Public Library. 2017. “We Belong Here.” https://www.hplct.org/library-services/immigration -citizenship/community-civic-participation/we-belong-here.
Civic Education in Public Libraries • 209Heritage Foundation. 2016. Blueprint for Balance: A Federal Budget for 2017. Washington, DC: Heritage Foun- dation. http://thf-reports.s3.amazonaws.com/2016/BlueprintforBalance.pdf. Iverson, Sandy. 2008. “Librarianship and Resistance.” In Questioning Library Neutrality: Essays from Progres- sive Librarian, edited by Alison Lewis. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice. Jaeger, Paul T., Ursula Gorham, John Carlo Bertot, and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2013. “Democracy, Neutrality, and Value Demonstration in the Age of Austerity.” Library Quarterly 83 (4): 368–82. Joeckel, Cartleton Bruns. 1935. “The Government of the American Public Library.” Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Klineman, Dan. 2008. “The ALA Knows It Is Liberal and Losing Members Who Are ‘Disgusted with the National Organization’; Refugees Reach Out to SafeLibraries.” SafeLibraries, November 14. http:// safelibraries.blogspot.com/2008/11/ala-knows-it-is-liberal-and-losing.html. Kranich, Nancy (Ed.). 2001. Libraries and Democracy: The Cornerstones of Liberty. Chicago: American Library Association. Lankes, R. David. 2011. The Atlas of New Librarianship. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Las Vegas-Clark County Library District. 2016. “Education and Political Discussion.” Event, October 22. http://www.lvccld.org/events/index.cfm?sOrderpStartDate%2C1a.Library%2C1a.EventType&start _recordp1&viewp1&fromtimep10%2F22%2F2016&totimep&nEvnttpp0&nLbrp0&nAgep0&AgeFrom p0&AgeTop&nSpecp0&sKwrdp. Lawrence Public Library. 2016a. “Great Books Discussion: Democracy in America.” Event, November 5. http://www.lawrence.lib.ks.us/news-events/events/great-books-discussion-2-2016-11-05/. Lawrence Public Library. 2016b. “Tales of Two Americas with John Freeman, Sarah Smarsh, & Whitney Terrell.” Event, November 9. http://www.lawrence.lib.ks.us/news-events/events/tales-of-two-americas -with-john-freeman-sarah-smarsh-whitney-terrell/. Lawrence Public Library. 2016c. “The Internet’s Own Boy: Open Access and the Future of Information.” Event, October 25. http://www.lawrence.lib.ks.us/news-events/events/the-internets-own-boy-open -access-and-the-future-of-information/. Louisville Free Public Library. 2016. “Government, Civics, and Citizenship Short Course.” Event, Septem- ber 29. http://www.lfpl.org/events/index.php?compdetail&eIDp75442&yearp2016&monthp10. McChesney, Robert D. 2004. The Problem of the Media: U.S. Communication Politics in the Twenty-First Century. New York: New York University Press. Memphis Public Libraries. 2016. “Great Conversations Fall 2016.” http://www.memphislibrary.org/great -conversations-fall-2016/. Preer, Jean L. 2008. Library Ethics. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Public Library Association. 2017. “Post-Election Resources.” American Library Association. http://www.ala .org/pla/tools/post-election. Quammie, Alison N. 2016. “Biblio File: Election Happenings @ Mid-Manhattan Library!” New York Public Library, October 19. https://www.nypl.org/blog/2016/10/19/selected-election-resource. Schiller, Herbert. 1996. Information Inequality. New York: Routledge. Schlanger, Zoe. 2017. “Rogue Scientists Race to Save Climate Data from Trump.” Wired, January 19. https:// www.wired.com/2017/01/rogue-scientists-race-save-climate-data-trump/. Stack, Sam, and Robert Waterson. 2013. “Democracy and Citizenship Education: Fostering Clarity of Mean- ing through John Dewey.” Journal of Philosophy and History of Education 63 (1): 195–207. St. Charles City-County Library District. 2016. “Programming and Events Calendar.” Newsletter, Septem- ber/October. https://issuu.com/scccountylibrarydistrict/docs/septoct2016final.
210 • The Library QuarterlyTeton County Library. 2016. “Candidate Forum: Teton County Conservation District and School District Board.” Event, October 20. http://tclib.org/programs/adults. Theater of Public Policy. 2017. “Our Work.” http://t2p2.net/our-work/.Jenny S. Bossaller: associate professor at the University of Missouri’s iSchool. Bossaller teaches and writes about public libraries, information policy, and history. She codeveloped a public library lead- ership program (PuLL) that emphasizes community and professional immersion and coauthored Introduction to Public Libraries (third edition). E-mail: Bossallerj@missouri.edu.