Rural Public Libraries as Community Change Agents: Opportunities for Health Promotion Mary Grace Flaherty Assistant Professor, School of Information & Library Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Email: mgflaher@email.unc.edu David Miller Library Director, Farmville Public Library, 4276 W. Church Street, Farmville, NC, Email: dmiller@farmville-nc.com Rural residents are at a disadvantage with regard to health status and access to health promotion activities. In many rural communities, public libraries offer support through health information provision; there are also opportunities for engagement in broader community health efforts. In a collaborative effort between an academic researcher and a rural public library director in North Carolina, pedometers and an individualized online health self-assessment program were made available to library users. The activi- ties were adopted enthusiastically. Feedback included encouragement for more such opportunities; some claimed the activities improved awareness and supported healthy behavior change. With minimal investment, rural public libraries can support healthy lifestyle activities. They also afford a unique environment where library staff can collab- orate with researchers to introduce, assess and evaluate community health initiatives. As we train future practitioners, we should embrace the opportunities that rural public libraries can provide for collaborative initiatives to invoke positive community change. Keywords: public libraries, health promotion, rural health, online health assessment, pedometers Introduction to health screenings, vaccine clinics, and health fairs (Malachowski, 2014). Public libraries throughout the United As public libraries become increasingly States are responding to communi- involved in health promotion activities, ties’ needs for information and resource the need for systematic evaluation and as- provision in many areas. As longtime sessment as well as opportunities for col- educational institutions and literacy en- laboration around these activities will also ablers, they are continuously adapting to increase. In this way, public libraries can expand their repertoires to account for serve as community incubators for under- new types of literacy skills and training standing ways to enhance individual well- in areas such as information, technology being and overall community health. and health. Concomitant with this expan- sion is an increasing number of all types Rural Communities and Public of programs in all sizes and types of librar- Libraries ies. A majority of libraries now offer some type of health programming (Bertot, Real, Nearly one in five Americans lives in Lee, McDermott & Jaeger, 2015). These a rural area (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014). can range from training on evaluating With regard to health status, rural resi- health information and talks by providers dents can be at a serious disadvantage. J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 2—(Spring) April 2016 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education 143 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/2/6
144 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE They are more likely to be obese, be un- North Carolina insured, have lower incomes, suffer from a chronic illness, and be older than those According to the North Carolina Insti- residing in metropolitan areas (Befort, tute of Medicine (NCIOM) Task Force on Nazir & Perri, 2012; Gamm, 2010; U.S. Rural Health (2014), one in three North Census Bureau, 2010). Many small com- Carolinians (almost 3 million individu- munities are lacking when it comes to sup- als) lives in a rural area and nearly one in port for health care, they are often devoid four rural resident lives below the poverty of access to hospitals and clinics. Ten per line. These individuals have less access to cent of rural counties have no primary care health care services, have a higher likeli- physician (Gamm, 2010). The ubiquitous hood of engaging in risky health behav- nature of public libraries in rural areas can iors (e.g. smoking) and a higher mortality help with these deficits; more than half rate than those living in urban areas. Rural of all U.S. public libraries serve popula- residents in North Carolina are more likely tions of fewer than 10,000 (Pearlmutter & to die from diabetes, lung disease, heart Nelson, 2011). Public libraries that serve disease, unintentional injuries and suicide rural populations can make a positive im- (NCIOM, 2014). A recent assessment by pact not only on their communities’ needs the Task Force calls for better investment for health information; but they also have strategies and collaboration among pub- the opportunity to provide activities that lic agencies to address health disparities promote individual and community health in rural communities. As community re- and well-being. source providers, public libraries are well The maker space movement, increas- positioned to contribute to these efforts. ing varieties of program provision, and all types of literacy (e.g. digital, financial, Farmville Public Library etc.) training are examples of initiatives underway as public libraries evolve from The Town of Farmville is located in mid- repositories to community centers. As eastern North Carolina and was founded in public libraries evolve and adapt, there is a 1872. It became known as a tobacco town greater emphasis on programs and activi- in the early 20th century, thanks to the A.C. ties for patrons. In fact, numbers for pro- Monk Company, a major international to- gram attendance in all types of libraries bacco dealer located there. The success of (large, small, rural and urban) increased A.C. Monk helped the town prosper by at- more than 30% nationwide since 2004 tracting many businesses and people to the (Institute of Museum and Library Servic- area. The Farmville Public Library (FPL) es, 2014). Some public libraries support was established to serve the citizens of community health and health promotion Farmville, a population of close to 5000, through program offerings, such as health though all residents of Pitt County (popu- fairs, while others have embedded staff to lation 175,000; United States Census Bu- support health activities (Malachowski, reau, 2014) are eligible for a library card 2014). In Pima County, Arizona a public and use the library’s services on a consis- health nurse is on staff at the public li- tent basis. The population of Farmville is brary (Malkin & Feingold, 2014). While 48.1% White and 49.7% Black or African the overall majority of public libraries of- American; 28% of all families were clas- fer health and wellness programs, distri- sified as below the poverty line in the past bution is uneven, nearly three-fourths of 12 months; over 18% of all residents did suburban libraries offer health and well- not have health insurance in 2013 (United ness programs, but less than half of rural States Census Bureau, 2014). public libraries have this service (Bertot et Like many small, rural towns in east- al., 2014). ern North Carolina, access to health care
Rural Public Libraries as Community Change Agents 145 and information is limited and a culture of sults section. Five months after the library healthy habits is difficult to find. While received the pedometers (Sept. 2014), the there are medical offices in Farmville, author visited the FPL and interviewed statistics show they do little to jumpstart the library director to elicit information a healthy lifestyle. For example, obesity on how the project was implemented and is a major problem for Farmville and Pitt community members’ reactions. County; in fact, 72.7% of adults are obese or overweight, and more than one in three Online Health Assessment Tool children in Pitt County are obese or over- weight (U.S. Centers for Disease Control Based partly on the communities’ posi- and Prevention, 2015). While there are tive reaction to the pedometer program, trained medical professionals employed in the FPL agreed to pilot test access to an Farmville, it is clear that an annual visit online health assessment tool, the Caro- to one’s general practitioner does not al- lina Health Assessment Research Tool ways change years, and generations, of (CHART). The CHART tool was designed unhealthy lifestyles. by researchers at The University of North In a collaborative effort between an Carolina at Chapel Hill Gillings School of academic researcher at The University of Global Public Health to: assess behavioral North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of risk factors for cancer and other chronic Information and Library Science and the health conditions; to improve participant/ FPL, health promotion efforts have been patient awareness and motivation to mod- introduced and are being evaluated in this ify behavioral risks; and to aid in launch- rural community. ing interventions to reduce behavioral risks (chart.unc.edu). CHART consists of a number of modules with question- Methods naires that result in a health summary with tips and suggestions for behavior change. Two different health promotion initia- The modules offered during this study in- tives were undertaken at the FPL over a cluded: physical activity; eating; alcohol 20-month period: pedometer lending and use; tobacco use; and weight. The library access to an online health assessment tool director used strategic recruiting to in- provided by the library. Methods em- clude varying gender, ages and ethnicities ployed for each of the initiatives are de- to identify 10 participants for the study. scribed separately below. Those participants were given access to the CHART tool; all 10 completed the as- Pedometer Lending sessment on their own computers, though they were made aware that they could use To recruit research partners, the author the library’s computers to complete the as- gave a presentation at the North Carolina sessments. The initial or baseline assess- Public Library Directors’ Association an- ments were completed in April–May 2015. nual meeting and described activities for Approximately six months later, follow-up involvement in potential research projects assessments were completed by nine of the in public libraries. As a result, the direc- same ten individuals (one participant was tor of the FPL volunteered to participate lost to follow-up) in November-December in a feasibility study to test the use of pe- 2015. Participants were given a $25 Ama- dometers for health promotion. Thirty-five zon gift card upon completion of each of low-cost pedometers were supplied to the the initial and the follow-up assessments. library in April 2014. Administration and Both of these research project initia- logistics for lending was left to the discre- tives were determined to be exempt by The tion of FPL staff, and is described in the re- University of North Carolina at Chapel
146 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Hill Institutional Review Board (March 5, 2014; Jan. 21, 2015). Results Pedometer Project The pedometers were introduced to pa- trons in May 2014 with the project name: “Get Walking at Your Library” to patrons with a press release in the local newspaper (The Farmville Enterprise). Posters (Fig- ure 1) were also displayed throughout the library and community. The Get Walking at Your Library cam- paign supplied pedometers to 30 patrons over a three-month period. To circulate the pedometers, the staff used a sign-out sheet with the patron’s name, number, and email so they could contact them for feed- back. The checkout period for the pedom- Figure 1. Promotional poster for pedometer eters was 30 days. project. Feedback on the pedometer program from patrons included: ceived from it, FPL spearheaded a 5K road • “I was encouraged to walk more” race and one-mile fun run in May 2015 in • “very good” partnership with the Town of Farmville • “great idea” Parks and Recreation department. Out of • “positive experience . . . I would use the 125 participants in this event, at least the service again” 10% had participated in the pedometer • “a definite incentive to take more steps program. during my day” Patrons also gave positive encourage- Online Health Assessment Tool ment for the library to offer more health and wellness programs. In April 2015, the FPL made an online Negative feedback was related to the health assessment tool, the Carolina Health quality of the pedometer and difficulties Assessment Research Tool (CHART), with using it: available to 10 patrons. Those 10 individu- als completed baseline assessments during • “Only used one day—pedometer kept April–May 2015. There were four men going off and I had to continually reset and six women, with ages ranging from 19 it” to 63 years. Nine participants identified as • “I was disappointed that I kept having White; there was one Black/African Amer- the pedometer reset without my knowl- ican. Four were college graduates; five had edge . . . I was, however, encouraged to some college, and one was a high school walk more.” graduate. Six were employed, two were • “I plan to buy a higher quality one with self-employed, one was out of work, and a guard so it doesn’t fall off so often.” one was unable to work. Eight had health With the momentum from the pedom- insurance; one did not know and one did eter program and positive feedback re- not. For household income range of par-
Rural Public Libraries as Community Change Agents 147 ticipants, two made more than $75K; three Table 1. More Attention to Health. were between $50–$75K; three made less than $35K, and two did not answer. Response Number of Participants Anecdotal feedback on the CHART as- Yes 5 sessment included: No 4 “I found the initial assessment website very easy to navigate . . . it really served to assessment also completed a short sur- acknowledge to me that I am headed in the vey, which included the following two right direction.” questions on their experiences using the “it was easy to navigate . . . it nudged me CHART tool. to open my eyes to my excuses as to why I had gained 10 lbs . . . I had to really pay at- 1. Did finishing the first assessment make tention to what works for me . . . I stopped you pay more attention to your health breakfast and felt a lot better . . . and (for example, did you pay more atten- ‘Wa-La’ 5 lbs. thinner!” tion to your diet, or physical activity levels)? Table 1 shows results for an- “The use of the site was very easy. I liked swers to the first question. that I could see my standing with oth- For those who answered positively, ers that are involved. For me, it validated the following details were provided: information I already knew and validated changes I need to make. Yes I would say I “Yes, became more thoughtful about felt encouraged to be healthier . . . I’m glad activity and increasing it when I can. to be apart of this study.” More thoughtful about healthy eating habits and changes I can make.” (Note: “I would like to Thank You for letting me this individual reported having gone participate in the joint health and wellness from 215 to 210 lbs.) project. Everything worked perfectly. It was a breeze going thru the website. I am “My weight, I weigh too much for my even more encouraged to eat better and height.” exercise more. Any information that you may have concerning good health and bet- “Somewhat, tried to do more fruits and ter living please send to me, I would enjoy vegs.” reading.” Approximately six months after the “Trying to pay more attention to diet; baseline CHART assessment, the same 10 certainly have increased activity.” participants were invited to complete a fol- low-up assessment; nine of the ten did so. “Yes more careful on food purchases.” Overall, most categories remained similar One participant, who answered no, between baseline and follow-up. However, supplied the following: “Not really, for the question on weight for the follow- I had started an improved diet and up assessment (six out of nine answered), exercise program about 1.5 years ago four reported having lost weight (5 lbs.; 7 and am happy with that.” lbs.; 16 lbs. and 20 lbs.); the other two re- ported having stayed within one pound of The second question on using CHART their weight between the two assessments. was: In addition, reports of engaging in moder- ate physical activity increased across the 2. Did finishing the first assessment have sample. any effect on your health behaviors The nine who completed the follow-up (for example, diet, physical activity,
148 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 2. Effect on Health Behaviors. focused on proper diet and I am definitely more active. My UP provides unexpected Response Number of Participants motivation and encouragement. I am plan- Yes 5 ning to remain focused and keep looking No 4 for more information so that I can continue to be challenged. The library has always been a great resource for me.” interaction with health care provid- er)? Table 2 shows results for answers Discussion to the second question. The health behaviors that participants This pilot project, designed to explore how rural public libraries can engage in identified were either physical activity or diet: community health promotion, included two types of activities and demonstrated “Increased my activity level.” the potential for a rural public library to have a positive effect on individual health. “I now have a basic UP (Jawbone); I am The feedback from the community regard- biking 20-30 mins. daily and walking ing the efforts was extremely positive, and has increased to at least an hour—av- according to library staff, patrons have erage 15-17000 steps daily.” (Note: come to expect health and wellness infor- the UP is a personal activity tracking mation and programs from the library. To device.) respond to these expectations, the library has expanded their services, with offerings “Yes started paying attention to pedom- such as monthly on-site monthly blood eter.” (Note: this individual reported pressure screening and instituting the 5K having gone from 180 to 160 lbs.) race as a regular activity. Since the project began, the library “I eat more fruits and vegetables.” director has been appointed the town’s Wellness Coordinator. As such, he has al- “Yes—diet.” ready had an impact on imparting healthy The follow-up survey also included behaviors during town functions by ensur- the question: What types of health ing there are healthy food and beverage promotion activities would you like options at meetings. Previously the meal the library to provide, if any? The options were mainly red meat, potatoes, answers to this question focused assorted desserts and sweet tea, now fresh on programs or activities related to fruit, vegetables and water are part of the nutrition (sample menus, portion size, regular fare. Besides making organiza-tional menu changes, the library could of- cooking demos; eating for healthy liv- fer complementary programs to promote ing) and increasing activity (exercise; nutritional literacy. Research shows those 5K; workout videos; senior fitness). who accurately estimate portion sizes and One participant summarized her experi- use and interpret food labels have better ence with the CHART tool in the follow- health outcomes (Cha et al., 2014). Four ing manner: of 10 participants in the CHART assess-ment mentioned interest in nutritional pro- “I truly appreciate the opportunity to grams, so this may be a logical trajectory participate in this assessment. I had been for future health initiatives and programs. procrastinating about getting serious about Another area for future consideration is diet and exercise. This was definitely the the use of personal fitness tracking devices nudge that I needed. I have become more (two CHART participants mentioned us-
Rural Public Libraries as Community Change Agents 149 ing them: Jawbone UP and pedometer). practitioner communities; this can happen The library could host workshops, insti- directly and through student involvement. tutionalize lending programs, organize Training our students and future librarians walking groups, and if there is an interest, to conduct research, from data collection use social media to share progress. and analysis to performing evaluations and community assessments, will guide Opportunities for Public Library Health our services and enhance our capability Promotion Programs to measure their effectiveness. Creating outreach opportunities and partnerships The rural public library is not only a re- for collaboration is a win-win proposition. pository where patrons can find health in- For these relationships to be fruitful and formation, but increasingly it can serve as effective, it is imperative to identify will- a community organization with the poten- ing partners. This can occur by reaching tial for having a positive impact on com- out to and engaging with library practi- munity health. With minimal resources, tioners in our communities, and provid- rural public libraries can offer health pro- ing opportunities for student involvement grams and opportunities, guided by input through class projects, field experiences and feedback from patrons. For example, and internships. nutrition workshops and healthy cooking demonstrations might be offered by col- Limitations laborative efforts with cooperative exten- sion agents, local public health department There are limitations to this study. First, staff or graduate students from nearby uni- the sample size was small, and though versities. Some public libraries have found purposefully selected to include a range qualified community members who vol- of individuals was not random in nature, unteer to teach yoga, Tai-chi classes, and so generalizability is difficult. In addi- other varieties of fitness classes (Flaherty, tion, there may have been bias due to self- 2013). The library could help to organize selection of participants. For example, walking groups and provide maps of local those who were willing to participate may places of interest within walking distance have been more attuned to their behaviors of the library. Summer reading prizes and life factors that affect health, such as might include pedometers and personal diet and physical activity. Also, behavior fitness tracking devices, and books on dif- change was self-reported, and so could ferent types of physical activity. Storytime have been over, under or misrepresented. programs can incorporate books with ac- tive themes and activities such as dancing, Conclusion marching, and stretching to jumpstart fit- ness with preschoolers (Woodson, Timm The overarching mission of public li- & Jones, 2011). If there is room and inter- braries is to provide access to information, est, an exercise bike in the teen area might educational opportunities and resources. inspire activity as well (Flaherty, 2014). These can all be leveraged to support in- Friends of the Library groups and volun- dividual and community health, especially teers may be likely partners in these en- in rural communities. Our preliminary ef- deavors to promote community health. forts found that patrons are receptive to engaging in library-sponsored health pro- Implications for LIS practice and motion activities, even though they may Education not be what has been typically expected or historically offered. By investigating Public libraries afford an opportunity the use of public libraries as centers for for LIS researchers to collaborate with our health promotion and collaborating with
150 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE librarians as research partners, we can Library Research Seminar VI Conference, Oct. 7, implement, assess and evaluate initiatives Urbana, Illinois. and activities to support and promote com- Flaherty, M.G. (2013). The Public Library as munity health. As we train future library Health Information Resource? (Doctoral disser-tation). Retrieved from Proquest dissertations and leaders, we should not overlook the col- theses. (3561444). laborative opportunities that rural pub- Gamm, L.D. (2010). Rural Healthy People 2010: A lic libraries can provide to investigate Companion Document to Healthy People 2010, initiatives to instill positive community Volume 1. College Station, TX: The Texas A&M change. University System Health Science Center, School of Rural Public Health, Southwest Rural Health Acknowledgments Research Center.Institute of Museum and Library Services. (2014). Public Libraries in the United States Survey This study was funded by a Junior Fac- Fiscal Year 2011. Retrieved from http://www. ulty Research grant award from the Uni- imls.gov/assets/1/workflow_staging/AssetMan- versity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. ager/4487.PDF The authors would like to thank Anne Malachowski, M. (2014) Public Libraries Partici- Glauber Cabell and Samantha Kaplan for pating in Community Health Initiatives. Journal of Hospital Librarianship, 14(3), 295–302, DOI: assistance with data collection and data 10.1080/15323269.2014.924754 analysis. Malkin, K. B., & Feingold, S. K. (2014). A Library, A Nurse, and Good Health. Computers Informat- References ics Nursing, 32(12), 559–561. North Carolina Institute of Medicine (NCIOM) Befort, C.A., Nazir, N., & Perri, M.G. (2012). Prev- Task Force on Rural Health. (2014). Rural alence of obesity among adults from rural and Health 2014. Retrieved from http://www.nciom. urban areas of the United States: findings from org/task-forces-and-projects/?task-force-on-ru- NHANES (2005–2008). Journal of Rural Health, ral-health 28(4), 392–397. Pearlmutter, J. & Nelson, P. (2011). When small is Bertot, J.C., Real, B., Lee, J., McDermott, A.J. & all. American Libraries, 42(1/2), 44–47. Jaeger, P.T. (2015). 2014 Digital Inclusion Sur- U.S. Census Bureau. (2014). FAQ’s. Retrieved vey: Findings and Results. College Park, MD: from https://ask.census.gov/faq.php?id=5000& Information Policy & Access Center, University faqId=5971. of Maryland College Park, Available at http:// U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). Current Population digitalinclusion.umd.edu/ Survey, 2008 and 2010 Annual Social & Econom- Bertot, J.C., Jaeger, P.T., Lee, J., Dubbels, K., Mc- ic Supplements. Retrieved from http://www.cen- Dermott, A.J. & Real, B. (2014). 2013 Digital sus.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/data/incpovhlth/2009/ Inclusion Survey: Survey Findings and Results. tab9.pdf. College Park, MD: Information Policy & Access U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Center, University of Maryland College Park, (2015). Community Profile: Pitt County, North Available at http://ipac.umd.edu/ Carolina. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/ Cha, E., Kim, K. H., Lerner, H. M., Dawkins, C. nccdphp/dch/programs/communitiesputtingpre- R., Bello, M. K., Umpierrez, G., & Dunbar, S. B. ventiontowork/communities/profiles/obesity-nc_ (2014). Health literacy, self-efficacy, food label pitt-county.htm. use, and diet in young adults. American Journal Woodson, D., Timm, D. & Jones, D. (2011). Teach- of Health Behavior, 38(3), 331–339. ing kids about healthy lifestyles through stories Flaherty, M.G. (2014). Collaborating with Public and games: Partnering with public libraries to Libraries to Promote Community Health: Pre- reach local children. Journal of Hospital Librari- liminary Results of Pedometers and Pedal Power. anship, 11(1), 59–69.