THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT DAN LACY rrw~ X recent controversy over the State Department's overseas li- I braries has led to the publication of a spate of information about this pre- viously little-known activity.' Public statements, congressional hearings, tele- vision programs, radio broadcasts, and press headlines have explored with much heat and with some light almost every phase of the program. In consequence, to undertake a descriptive review of the libraries and their operations would be a wasteful and tedious repetition. Instead, I should like to consider not the library program alone, but the more general question of the use of books by this gov- ernment as a means toward attaining its foreign objectives, and to do so not descriptively but critically. I should like particularly to consider certain underly- ing concepts, inherited practices, and ad- ministrative patterns which it seems to me have hampered the effectiveness of the book program and to try to suggest more productive alternatives. In doing so, we shall, of course, be discussing a program primarily in terms of its limitations and weaknesses and giving unconstrained consideration to what might be a more nearly ideal opera- tion. As we do so, I hope you will not forget, as I cannot, that the hundreds of capable and devoted men and women who have made this program have had no such luxury of ideal choice. They have had to create a reality, with all the neces- sary imperfections of reality, and to do so hurriedly, in strange countries, among new and demanding problems, subject to inconsistent and changing administrative directions, provided with few resources, and harassed by ignorant attacks. Any- one who has been privileged, as I have been, to work for a time with the pro- fessional staff of the book program real- izes that its success, remarkable in the circumstances, is the measure of their skill and devotion. Suffice it to say, by way of description, that the United States Information Agency, as the recent inheritor of this function from the State Department, op- erates 196 libraries in 64 countries with total book holdings of over 2,000,000 vol- umes, with an annual circulation of more than 10,000,000, and with an annual at- tendance of more than 36,000,000.2 It also contributes to the support of 34 bi- national cultural institutes, with inci- dental library activities. This program was built up by the State Department over the years 1946-52, largely from ele- ments created by other agencies for other purposes. It took over the OWI libraries set up for wartime propaganda 1 See especially the public statement issued in mimeographed form by Robert L. Johnson, adminis- trator of the International Information Adminis- tration, on July 15, 1953, and printed in the NIew York Times for that date; Henry James, Jr., "The Role of the Information Library in the United States International Information Program," Library Quar- terly, XXIII (April, 1953), 75-114; Dan Lacy, "Aid to National Policy," Library Trends, II (July, 1953), 146-70, in addition to the extensive press comment during the period February-July, 1953. 2 All figures are as of July, 1953. 178
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 179 and reference purposes; the Amerika Haeuser created by OMGUS as a part of the occupation program in Germany; the similar institutions created by the United States forces in Austria; the libraries operated by the Army in Korea; the SCAP Information Centers in Japan; the cultural institutes created by the co- ordinator of inter-American affairs; and the libraries set up in Latin America by the American Library Association under government contract. To these it added from time to time institutions established under its own auspices. In addition, the USIA presents about 1,250,000 books and periodicals a year to foreign institutions and individuals, stimulates the export of American books in a variety of ways, particularly through the Informational Media Guaranty Pro- gram, and fosters the translation of about 400 books a year, especially into Asian tongues, in which few American books are otherwise available. The Over- seas Operations Administration, as the heir of the Technical Assistance Admin- istration of the State Department, took over the scattered book and libraries ac- tivities carried on under that program. These varied activities brought from their several origins staffs, policies, and operating practices, as well as actual facilities, developed to meet particular and diverse objectives. Their subsequent history has been shaped in turn by the administrative patterns, the policies, and the shifting emphases of the total in- fornation program of which they be- came a part. Governing that total pro- gram was a rather clear-cut conception of the basic problems to which it was ad- dressed. At considerable risk of over- simplification, one can perhaps say that those problems were seen as threefold: 1. People abroad disliked and mis- trusted the United States. This could only be, it was thought, because they were ignorant of this country or mis- understood its aims. Obviously, what was needed was to disseminate informa- tion about the United States-in the words of the Smith-Mundt Act, to "pre- sent a full and fair picture." This concep- tion of the problem dominated the propa- ganda effort until 1950. 2. People abroad proved susceptible to Soviet propaganda. This could only be, it was thought, because they failed to penetrate Soviet deceit. The obvious remedy was to expose the falsehood of the Soviet pretensions-in official lan- guage, to wage a "campaign of truth." This concept has dominated subsequent thinking about the information program. 3. People abroad did not produce as efficiently as Americans. This must necessarily be in part at least, it was thought, because they did not know how. The obvious remedy, in the hackneyed phrase, was to export "know-how"-to provide technical knowledge and skills. It was this conception that underlay the Technical Assistance Program. Now, as a matter of fact, all of these problems are real and important, and the proposed solutions are not unrealistic; but as I shall try to show hereafter, so limited a conception of the problem, one so exclusively concerned with symptoms rather than causes, involves a vast and potentially tragic oversimplification. The programs addressed to the solu- tion of these problems have been pro- foundly affected not only by the ac- cepted definition of the problems them- selves but also by certain administrative contexts and certain inherited attitudes which were frequently ill adapted to the actual situation. Among the most im- portant and most damaging of these' circumstances has been the relatively rigid and complex administration pattern
180 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Wthin which the program has operated. Time does not permit even a resum6 of the administrative history of the in- formation program and of the place of books in it. It must suffice to say that operational considerations have led to a distinct separation of the radio, press, films, educational exchange, and book programs and to a domination of both planning and execution by these media as such. Though this weakness had been recognized within the State Department and steps have long been in process to redress it, it remains the case that it is difficult to plan or to execute a project combining two or more media, and espe- cially difficult to undertake one employ- ing techniques other than these media. And for reasons that will appear, such projects are essential to the best use of books. Perhaps even more serious has been the almost complete administrative separation of the Technical Assistance Program from the information program, in spite of the essentially inseparable character of many of their instruments and objectives. Recent developments have aggravated these difficulties by transferring the Technical Assistance Program from the State Department to the Overseas Operations Administration and the book program to the United States Information Agency, while leav- ing in the State Department the Educa- tional Exchange Program, with which the book program needs to be particu- larly intimately associated. The most apparently relevant bodies of experience on which the State Depart- ment could draw in developing its in- formational policies and strategic tech- niques were those of psychological war- fare and of advertising. The nucleus of the program's staff came to the State Department from the wartime activities of the OWI, and the most significant theoretical analysis in the field of inter- national persuasion was developed by persons in the United States and in Europe engaged in direct psychological warfare. Advertising commanded respect as a body of skills in stimulating people to predetermined behavior which daily proved its efficacy. Both these fields had much to offer in the way of directly ap- plicable techniques, but both suffered from a limitation, in that they were con- cerned with stimulating certain specific actions within a short time span and within an established framework of ide- ology and social pattern which could be accepted and utilized as a part of the process of persuasion. In so far as the State Department's information pro- gram was, or ought to have been, con- cerned with altering such basic ideologi- cal and social patterns over a long time span, the techniques of psychological warfare and of advertising were in some degree irrelevant or even contradictory. To take a specific case in point, a psychological warfare team charged with damaging the morale of a body of Ger- man troops and encouraging their sur- render could take cognizance of the au- thoritarian pattern of German life and utilize it by destroying confidence of the troops in their constituted leaders and substituting awe and respect for the power of the United States forces as a behavior-orienting pole of authority. A State Department information officer in postwar Germany concerned with con- tributing to the disruption of the au- thoritarian pattern itself and the encour- agement of democratic social patterns faced a problem of almost infinitely greater complexity and difficulty. Simi- larly, to persuade a weary and broken Europe to draw its strength again to- gether and, for the third time in a genera- tion, to confront a threatened tyranny
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 181 with a bold hazard of life itself, and to do so under the leadership of an unfamiliar and mistrusted America-this is some- thing different from selling cigarettes. By no cleverness shall we create the steadfast hope that is needed to outface the despair of this desperate age. The bodies of experience on which we need to draw are perhaps those of the great teachers and the great missionaries, but their skills are not ones that can be con- trived to meet an occasion. In drawing on familiar professional skills for its informational effort, it was, of course; natural that the State Depart- ment should also draw on familiar media and familiar patterns of their use. Radio networks, press services, illustrated news magazines, and documentary film series all afforded prototypes of information service activities. So did the public li- brary, whose patterns of operation gov- erning concepts were taken over initially with relatively little critical analysis or adaptation to the special circumstances of the information program. Certain ad- ditional patterns were later taken over from book publishing; but there was relatively little in the evolution of new techniques in the utilization of books- or, for that matter, of other media-to meet the peculiar needs that were con- fronted. In part because of these inheritances, there was a preoccupation with quick, as opposed to lasting, results. The OWI background, with its pattern of short- tern psychological warfare operations, and the prestige of the so-called "fast" media (radio and press) contributed to this preoccupation. So did the character of day-to-day operations themselves, which produced an almost overriding pressure to deal now with this issue, now with that, as they presented themselves in the daily news. Beyond this, the sober judgment of many over the past few years has not estimated that means of peaceful persuasion had time left for any but quick effects or that any program that could look only to a distant future for its achievement would have space for function. Coupled with this preoccupation with speed was a similar preoccupation with a mass audience. Though concentration on "leaders" and "opinion molders" was a professed policy of the information pro- gram, in practice it was only in grants to foreign leaders by the Educational Ex- change Service that it was actually achieved. Throughout the rest of the program there was a constant effort to reach the largest possible number of people and a tendency to measure the relative effectiveness of various activities by the comparative size of their audi- ences. In part this grew from a natural assumption that instruments of persua- sion should persuade broadly and from a democratic conviction that it was the "grass-roots" opinion in foreign coun- tries that really mattered and not that of any elite. The inheritance from psy- chological warfare had special impor- tance in establishing this pattern of mass appeal. During the war the internal channels of communication in enemy countries were, of course, closed to for- eign penetration; if one wished to influ- ence the hostile population, he had to do so directly and through his own channels. Radio was the easiest means, and direct mass-audience broadcasts acquired a prestige that has been retained. The Technical Assistance Programn, like the information program proper, was shaped by factors of administrative con- text and inherited policies. From the old Interdepartmental Committee on Scien- tific and Cultural Cooperation, it had derived a decentralized pattern that di-
182 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY vided the actual responsibility for opera- tions among many agencies of the gov- ernment, each with a rather narrowly professional approach to its functions. This pattern afforded no means for at- tention to higher professional and tech- nical education or to library services and books as means of technical assistance except in their relevance to one or more specific and immediate projects. More- over, the State Department's over-all responsibilities on this program prior to its transfer to the Foreign Operations Administration were placed in the Bu- reau of Economic Affairs, administra- tively remote from the information pro- gram proper. The Technical Assistance Program was particularly penetrated with the con- viction that a "grass-roots" approach was essential. Medical programs, for ex- ample, were addressed to cleaning up specific sources of infection having a direct effect on the health of a locality rather than to building up medical schools and facilities for medical re- search. This almost passionate insistence on the direct approach to individuals doubtless grew out of a sound conviction that economic progress in the backward areas could come only with the attain- ment of higher productive skills by all their people. But there was an insuffi- cient realization that the general dis- semination of those skills could come only through a trained corps of experts and teachers in the country itself and that development of such a corps was usually the most urgent step toward reaching the masses. These, far too summarily sketched, were certain of the elements of the ad- ministrative and policy context within which the book program operated, ele- ments that have, in general, operated to limit the program's effectiveness. I think that one can particularly call attention to six important weaknesses that pro- ceeded from these causes. (Let me here repeat that this article is by design con- cerned primarily with elements of weak- ness, not of strength. The evidence is abundant that the book program, in spite of these weaknesses, was remark- ably effective, and it is obvious that other elements of the administrative and pol- icy pattern within which it operated contributed to this effectiveness.) One of these weaknesses was a too faithful reproduction abroad of the American public library. In many ways this was good. The freedom, the egali- tarianism, the enthusiasm for service of the American public library, together with many of its technical features, such as open-shelf collections, were among the strongest assets of the American in- formation centers overseas. On the other hand, the rather indiscriminate desire to please all possible users, which was one of their most attractive features, ma- terially diffused their political effective- ness. Also, a relative uniformity made adaptation to local situations difficult. In Near Eastern or Southeast Asian countries in which literacy in English was very low, for example, a different type of institution with a greater em- phasis on participating activities in the local vernaculars was perhaps more needed than a sizable library of English books. Only relatively late in the pro- gram did alternative means of using books receive emphasis comparable to that on the library program. A second weakness has been a too ex- clusive and even strident emphasis on overt pro-American and anti-Russian propaganda in the translation program and in the large-scale distribution of in- dividual titles. These are the two aspects of the book program in which there is a
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 183 specific selection of materials to reach a large audience, analogous to the radio and press programs. Like those pro- grams, these book activities have been affected by the oversimple analysis of needs and the emphasis on direct ap- proach. The results have been useful; but these aspects of the book program, in part also because they were simply too small to do so, have not really begun to deal with those central problems with respect to which they could be most useful. A third weakness has been a carry- over into the book program of an em- phasis on mass audiences, with which books were relatively ineffective. It is obvious that a few small and scattered American libraries, each with a collection of a few thousand books in English, can have no palpable effect on the generality of a foreign population. In India, for example, the ratio of libraries to people was as if one small-town library of less than 10,000 volumes served the whole population of the United States east of the Mississippi and north of the Ohio. In such a situation, to be concerned with the relatively indiscriminate enlargement of the clientele was absurd; it was obvi- ous, indeed, that only the utmost con- centration of effort on small "trigger" groups and individuals could hope to produce any perceptible effect. Yet sta- tistics of attendance and circulation re- mained a basic criterion of effectiveness. Similarly, the tone and level of the translation program, though not its size, was pitched at a mass audience rather than at the intellectual leaders who might have more effectively transmitted its content of ideas into action and into the formation of a local opinion. This emphasis on a mass audience had its parallel in a neglect of indigenous chan- nels of communication within the coun- tries which it was sought to reach. It is true that there were occasional gifts of small collections of books to libraries of foreign universities, and such USIS li- braries as that in London did an effective job of integrating themselves with the public library systems of the countries in which they were situated. But such occasional efforts were regarded as inci- dental to the primary programs, which sought to reach the foreign audience directly through American libraries and the distribution of American publica- tions. One can see the relative result of such a technique if one imagines that, for example, the ideas of the great French thinkers were able to reach Americans only through a few small libraries main- tained in this country by the French government, through the distribution of the original texts as published in France, and through occasional subsidized trans- lations rather than through their contri- bution to the content of American writ- ings in their several fields. A perhaps even more serious weakness was the im- possibility of fusing book programs with closely related activities, particularly with the work of the Educational Ex- change Service and of the Technical Co- operation Administration. If books had meaning and an effective role in inter- national communication, it was as an integral part of a total effort to achieve communication in certain broad areas of thought and technical skill and in as inti- mate a relation with the total process of education as books have in the formal educational system and in the general intellectual life of this country. The really fruitful use of books was made most difficult by the very autonomy of the book program. Finally, the greatest weakness of all was that the book program was always incomparably small in relation to the
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY task it needed to do. This failure to re- ceive adequate support was, in turn, very closely related to the general policy context in which the program was car- ried on, with its emphasis on those ele- ments of immediacy and mass audience in which books compared poorly with such media as radio and the press. Many of the uses of books which were most important and which we shall discuss a little later were simply impossible in terms of the kind of budget that was available for the use of books. Par- ticularly was this true in the Technical Assistance Program, where a gigantic world-wide effort at the dissemination of technical knowledge involving the an- nual expenditure of dozens of millions of dollars had paradoxically made prac- tically no provision whatever for the use of books as vehicles for that dissemina- tion. What, then, should have been the shape and character of the dominant policies of the book program? I think that any answer to this question must begin with some broader consideration of the character of the international problems to which the informatioa ac- tivities of the United States government needed to be addressed. These problems were, indeed, of a very different charac- ter and of almost infinitely greater com- plexity than had been conceived in the earlier days of the information program. If I were to undertake to characterize that problem in a phrase, I would de- scribe it as the restoration of unity. It is perhaps trite to point out that the world order which had held most of the nations together in a loose political and eco- nomic community under western Euro- pean and American hegemony had col- lapsed utterly in the last quarter-cen- tury. This was perhaps most obviously apparent in Asia. Here dwelt nearly half the world's population, bound to the rest of the human race both politically and economically by patterns of Western dominance. The people of Asia, with only occasional exceptions, lived either under direct western European political control or in an uneasy and partial independence like that of China, whose genuine free- dom to act politically was sharply cir- cumscribed. Even more closely were the people of Asia bound to the Western economy. The direction of their eco- nomic efforts beyond subsistence agri- culture was determined by the needs of Western markets. Western capital owned, and Western management directed, their limited industries. These nations, more- over, had their being in a world in which the patterns of effective political and economic organization were Western pat- terns founded on a Western technology which grew from a science and ultimately from a metaphysics peculiarly Western. A people not equipped with mastery of these underlying bodies of knowledge was incapable of functioning with gen- uine independence, whatever its formal political status. During the course of the second World War and the immediately succeeding years these patterns of Western political and economic control simply disinte- grated for a variety of reasons unneces- sary to recount here. Great nations with tens and hundreds of millions of people, such as India, Pakistan, Burma, the Philippines, and Indonesia, achieved their political freedom. Others, such as China, burst loose from the pattern of western European influence and became, indeed, under Russian tutelage violently hostile to that influence. An accompani- ment of this political development was the expropriation of Western capital and the seizure of the managment of Western enterprises, as in the case of British in-
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 185 vestments in Iranian oil or the Dutch in- vestments in Indonesian plantation agri- culture or the British and American in- vestments in the economy of China. The result has too often been a chaos m which an anachronistic relationship of metropo- lis to colony has justly disappeared but has not yet been replaced by a relation of equality. The creation of a world order reunit- ing Asia and the West, this time on terms of voluntary participation, is perhaps the great imperative of contemporary states- manship. The alternative is a hastening chaos and the probable absorption of the Asian powers into an order in which Communist totalitarianism provides the unifying ideas. But the creation of a vol- untary world order requires the genuine willingness and, further, the genuine ability of the Asian nations to participate as equals in that order. This means the sort of understanding of Western civili- zation and its purposes that will inspire confidence. It requires, moreover, a de- gree of mastery of Western sciences and of Western economic and political organ- ization that will enable the Asian powers to sustain an effectively functioning independent sovereignty. In most of the western European countries, as well, the dominant charac- teristic of the postwar years has been the weakness of unifying concepts and the consequent inability to sustain a united political course. Hardly one of the major Western powers has been able to achieve a stable internal political settlement in which the major elements of its popula- tion could confidently unite. Not since the early postwar years has either politi- cal party in Great Britain been able to maintain a dominant majority; the inter- nal disunity in France has produced re- peated cabinet crises approaching anar- chy. In Italy the current regime has no assured margin of support. It is note- worthy that even in the United States, though the national administration won a decisive victory in the 1952 election, the parties are divided with almost pre- cise equality in the Congress, and there is every indication that, as the Eisen- hower administration gives concrete real- ity to its program, the apparent near- unanimity of support which it enjoyed in the first session of Congress will prove to have been illusory and to have concealed a wide and very nearly irreconcilable divergence of opinion on specific issues. Even in the face of a Soviet menace so capable of overwhelming and indeed obliterating western European civiliza- tion, it has been impossible to achieve a truly effective unity of action in the free world. It is not, I think, an oversimplification to say that the restoration to the free world of the ability to act with unity or purpose is the test by which our civiliza- tion will stand or fall. One may say that this restoration of unity, in turn, requires three things. First, it requires the posses- sion of common attitudes. This was rela- tively easy when the world was dominat- ed by a few Western powers with a com- mon cultural history, a common philoso- phy, a common religion, a common set, in other worlds, of orienting beliefs, and when within each of those Western states actual political power tended to be con- centrated within a relatively small class with an even higher degree of homogenei- ty of purpose. As the broadening and deepening of the free world has vastly broadened the circle of those whose inde- pendent and voluntary assent must be given to fundamental political and eco- nomic decisions, the attainment of unity of purpose has become correspondingly more difficult. It is not now merely a matter of Great Britain and the United
186 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY States, or of France and Belgium, or of Italy and Spain being able to act in con- cert. It is a matter of the United States and Thailand, of Germany and India, of Great Britain and Egypt. And within each of those powers a unity of political action now requires the voluntary par- ticipation not of thousands but of mil- lions of persons-speaking in global terms, of hundreds of millions-of the most diverse cultural backgrounds, the most varied beliefs, the most conflicting economic interests. And yet, without the creation of a solid basis of common atti- tudes and common values, it is difficult to see how any community of purpose and action can be achieved. In the second place, unity of action requires a common appreciation of what is going on contemporarily in the world. One must not only approach the day's news with a certain set of common atti- tudes. The news itself must be communi- cated in relatively common terms. By "news" I mean here, of course, not alone day-to-day flow of headlines but the whole flow of contemporary history and the whole conceptual character of the contemporary world1. There can be no question that an underlying cause, for example, of the whole Iranian oil econo- my was the simple ignorance of the world oil economy under which the Iranian leaders suffered. Similarly, even though Indians and Americans have a strikingly similar humanitarian regard for human life, it is difficult for them to act in con- cert if they receive diametrically opposed pictures with regard to the charges of germ warfare in Korea. The achieving of any common and realistic understanding of contemporary events is, of course, made enormously more difficult by the internal and international tensions which distort reality at every turn. The third requirement for unity of action among the free nations is the ability of the less advanced nations to participate effectively and freely in the world economy, an equality which, in turn, requires a gigantic and swift ad- vance in the level of scientific and tech- nical knowledge-in the social and political as well as in the natural sciences -in those countries. It requires some- thing far vaster than any Point Four program of which we have yet conceived. These are enormous demands, but they are inescapable. The only alterna- tive to a free order is a totalitarian order, and the only basis of a free order is a community of knowledge and purpose. To meet these demands requires a very complex and extensive communication between cultures of precisely the sort of which books are an essential component. It is to the needs of that level and kind of communication that we should look in endeavoring to formulate the principal characteristics needed in the book program. In the first place, the book program must be very much larger. The current level of expenditure is trifling in the face of the most gigantic and difficult task of conveying ideas and knowledge that his- tory has ever encountered. Administra- tively, it is essential that the use of books be intimately associated with the educa- iional exchange service and with the Technical Assistance Program. Its isola- tion from these two programs is a major obstacle to the possible success of all three. Assuming adequate support and ap- propriate administrative context, the book program will need always to retain and somewhat, though not greatly, to expand the network of USIS libraries, utilizing them principally as high-level reference centers, staffed by professional American employees and intended pri-
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 187 marily to serve those who have impor- tant roles in the making of decisions or the dissemination of ideas. The need for institutions to afford general opportuni- ties for face-to-face contact with local citizens should be met by more informal means.3 But the primary expansion of the book program should take place outside pres- ent institutional patterns. Such an ex- pansion should distinguish clearly be- tween those activities aimed at convey- ing knowledge and ideas to other countnres and those aimed at disseminat- ing them within those countries. Book activities intended to bring in- formation to another country must be aimed at those persons most apt as re- ceptors. Books will, of course, be one of the instruments used directly by the mis- sion staff in its direct dealings with those, like government officials, who can apply information from abroad directly in their daily activities. But in so far as the com- munication process is directed toward a general and enduring effect upon general attitudes, the most effective receptors are professional intellectuals. They are the ones with a sufficient interest in for- eign ideas and books; the ones most com- petent to transmute and interpret ideas and knowledge to meet local needs; and the ones best situated to introduce novel elements into the general intellectual patterns of their countries. Two sorts of things need to be done to reach these groups. One is a far larger program than any heretofore attempted, aimed at building up the holdings of American and other useful books in the libraries of the institutions in which they work. In western Europe this would con- sist largely in aid to the principal nation- al and university libraries in their pres- ently quite inadequate acquisitions of American books and journals-a rela- tively simple and a relatively inexpen- sive operation, but one inescapably nec- essary at a time when not even the Brit- ish Museum can afford dollars for the comprehensive purchase of serious con- temporary American works. In Asia and the Middle East such a program would be more difficult, but it offers incalculable rewards. Here a whole new generation of leaders is being trained in a few universities, whose inadequacies are in part compensated for by their na- tionalistic fervor. They are the centers of the national awakening in those coun- tries. In the nearly total absence of trained leaders, their present students will quickly come to dominant positions in the technology, the economy, and the government of their country. The thirst for Western competence in these univer- sities is matched only by the hatred of Western dominance and the ill-informed suspicion of Western motives. The im- press here made on the students of the next decade may well be a decisive influ- ence on the history of a continent. In many countries of this area-Pakis- tan, India, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, and the Philippines, for example-English is the normally used language of higher in- struction, and it is generally read with ease by advanced university students throughout the area. At the same time, the present poverty of the libraries of the region assures that American books would receive immediate and intensive use. Just as the rapidly growing pro- grams of Asian studies in many American universities are helping thousands of stu- dents to be able to see the world through Asian eyes, an adequate program of pres- entation of American books to Asian and 8A more extended discussion of the complex question of the proper role of the libraries as spe- cific part of the book program is contained in my article, "Aid to National Policy," Library Trends, II (July, 1953), esp. 161-65.
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Middle Eastern universities could help this whole new generation of leaders to a fuller knowledge and appreciation of Western values and attitudes, a more accurate knowledge of the West, and the competence in Western skills essential to economic sovereignty. This needs to be done, however, with intelligence and care. Indiscriminate gifts will be wasted and resented; gifts of books unrelated to a larger purpose will generally be useless. Every gift of books should be part of a specific under- taking: to create, for example, or to strengthen a medical school at one uni- versity; to create an advanced depart- ment of economics at another; to estab- lish an institute of international relations at a third; to strengthen the research re- sources of a miniistry of agriculture. Each such undertaking should be sought by, and in significant part supported by, local authorities. It should include the necessary loans and exchanges of profes- sors, research personnel, and advanced students; the provision of adequate quar- ters and facilities; and the presentation of laboratory and other scientific equip- ment as well as books, all undertaken as a single integrated project. Moreover, and of the utmost impor- tance, the whole administration of such a project, and particularly the selection of books, must be with a single eye to its professional success. The intrusion of irrelevant political considerations-e.g., the screening of books to be presented to an Indian medical school to aid, let us say, its work in epidemiology, with a view to eliminating any by authors with a prior record of "listed" organizational affiliations-would be fatal to the ulti- mate political objectives of the program. So far, the only funds available for even the limited pursuit of such a pro- gram derive from the acts applying Fin- nish war-debt payments and a part of the interest payments on the recent Indian wheat loan to cultural exchanges with those countries. These have been too small to have a major effect, and their administration has been seriously-in the case of India, almost fatally up to the present-hampered by division of authority and by the administrative dif- ficulty in fusing a program embodying both books and professional exchanges. But they offer an opportunity under imaginative administration to indicate what could be done. The other major use of books as a means of approach to foreign intellectuals should be as one element in a variety of projects in which American and foreign intellectual leaders can jointly partici- pate. The possibilities of a sufficiently flexible and imaginative program of this sort are so many and diverse that they can be only suggested here. Hitherto work with foreign intellectual leaders has involved only bringing them here for a hurried three-month tour, paying travel costs for them to assume visiting profes- sorships here, and sending American pro- fessors abroad to lecture. Most of these activities have been carried on under the Fulbright program, and the fear that that program might be prostituted to narrowly political ends led to its being hedged with legislative restrictions which make difficult its use for many broader ends. Among the things which ought to be done are the following: 1. Holding a number of conferences like the Colloquium on Islamic Civiliza- tion so successfully sponsored by the Library of Congress and Princeton Uni- versity with State Department support. Conferences on Hindu and on Buddhist cultures are natural successors. 2. Making grants to American learned societies in such fields as philosophy, his-
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 189 tory, political science, and economics to enable them to carry on a variety of ac- tivities with their professional associates abroad. One can conceive, for example, of the American Political Science Asso- ciation being host to an informal but high-level conference on such a subject as the forms of international organization of the free world; or the American Eco- nomics Association similarly sponsoring a conference on the economics of national development or the techniques of eco- nomic analysis developed over the last ten or fifteen years. Such conferences would afford an opportunity for selected foreign leaders to work congenially and entirely free from government control in assocation with their colleagues from the free world in trying to develop common points of view on the crucial issues of that world. The multiplying effect of the ideas engendered there and disseminated at home would be out of all proportion to cost. Such societies ought also to be aided in distributing their journals abroad without charge to a select list of their choosing and to aid foreign scholars in the acquisition of significant American books in their fields. 3. The sponsoring of institutes, like that at Salzburg, in foreign universities as a means of assuring the continuing as- sociation of intellectual leaders from many free countries in the consideration of the major common problems of free society. These are but three possibilities out of many. The point is to utilize the existing scholarly organizations, taking advan- tage of their own imaginative ap- proaches, and aiding rather than dictat- ing their efforts toward creating common understanding in the areas of their re- spective disciplines. In all these, the use of books is an iMdispensable auxiliary whose exact character will be determined by the circumstance in each case. In western Europe and the more ad- vanced countries of Latin America, such endeavors to convey ideas to a small seminal group should definitely take precedence over activities aimed at reaching the general population directly with American books. The internal means of disseminating throughout those countries ideas formulated or received in their intellectual groups are excellent and far more eff ective than any direct means. It is not only that Frenchmen will, of course, always rely on French authors, French books, French libraries, rather than on American or other importations; it is that an imported idea can become effective only after it has found its place in the whole fabric of thought of the country to which it comes. An American idea will have force in France only as it becomes a French idea fully incorporated in a French system of thought. The idea of passive resistance through civil dis- obedience could never have reached the people of India directly through the writings of Thoreau; it was meaningful to them only as embodied, along with ideas from many other sources, in the philosophy of Gandhi. In the less advanced areas, however, especially in Asia and the Near East, aid in developing the means of disseminating ideas within those countries is needed. This involves two general areas of opera- tion: technical assistance to libraries and the development of facilities for publish- ing and distributing both translations and original works. Under the various exchange-of-persons programs a number of foreign librarians have been brought to the United States for experience or training, and a number of American librarians have been sent abroad to teach or conduct
190 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY demonstration projects; and the USIS libranans overseas have frequently been able to be helpful to their professional colleagues in meeting technical prob- lems. But nothing done to date has been on such a scale as to have mean- ingful results. Technical assistance and material aid to university libraries and to the research libraries of government ministries in the Middle East and Asia are essential if they are to be effective in the exploitation of their holdings, and are being given by UNESCO in such coun- tries as Iran. This ought to be one of the basic components in the American Tech- nical Assistance Program. Similar efforts at the present develop- ment in Asian countries of a public li- brary system on the American pattern seem to me, however, premature. I think there is neither the economic base, the volume of material, nor the literate clien- tele that could yet support such a sys- tem. What is needed first is a network of fundamental education centers with limited holdings of simple vernacular reading materials, with a few public libraries in the major cities capable of serving as the nuclei of a later general system. Perhaps even more essential is aid in the development of a publishing and book-distribution system capable of meeting the internal needs of Middle Eastern and Asian countries. There is simply not the means, in terms of either editorial and translating staff, printing plants, or distribution systems, to pro- duce more than a trickle of books in the vernacular languages. The appalling sig- nificance of this can hardly be stated for the half or more of the world's people imprisoned in tongues in which almost no part of the whole body of modern knowledge has appeared. Little begin- nings have been made. Franklin Publica- tions, Inc., brings some of the best skills in the American publishing world to the production of Arabic books and may ex- tend its activities to other Eastern coun- tries. The Burmese Translation Society has been aided in acquiring a modern printing plant. The translation program of USIS has given help to many publish- ers abroad seeking to bring out transla- tions of useful American books. But, again, nothing has yet been of a magni- tude capable of changing the situation fundamentally. Here is one of the most challenging of all fields for statesmanship and professional skill. In trying to suggest some of the varie- ty of ways in which it seems to me books and book skills ought to be used abroad by our government, I am less concerned about this or that particular project than about two fundamental imperatives. One is that the book program ought not to be bound by a slavish reproduction of meth- ods and institutions we use at home or by inherited and, it seems to me, often mistaken policy concepts derived from irrelevant circumstances. It ought to be based on the broadest and most thought- ful appraisal of need, on the freest and most flexible association with other ac- tivities, and on the fullest awareness of the rich and varied competences of books as instruments of extended and signifi- cant discourse. The other imperative is that the book program, like all our international infor- mation activities, should grow from a modest sense of our own part in a united free world. It is not so important to the preservation of the free world we inhabit that the ideas that unite it be American ideas as that they be valid ideas. Indeed, to the extent that ideas are peculiarly American, they are the less competent to serve as the basis of that unity of purpose which is our first need. The peculiar vir-
THE OVERSEAS BOOK PROGRAM 191 tues of books are ineffective in contrived propaganda; the freest of the vehicles of human thought, they achieve their po- tency in the free and earnest exchange of ideas. The whole underlying purpose of a sound book program should be to con- tribute to the means by which all the free peoples may be associated in beliefs to which they can all give assent To create and maintain such a book program will, of course, require respon- sible executive support, capable of sus- taining those who administer it under the sort of uninformed and irresponsible criticism that has always plagued our overseas information effort. If the United States is going to make any mature and meaningful contributions to the unity of the free world's purposes, it must, as the simplest beginning, show a sense of mature and responsible purpose in its own informational efforts. And those efforts must continue. For good or ill, foreign policy cannot today free itself from the responsibilities of public persuasion. As I tried to say in another place: The difficulty in obtaining ratification of the European Defense Community treaty by the very European powers which had planned and drawn it-a difficulty which threatened the whole basis of American foreign policy in Europe-showed with painful clarity how fruitless is an agreement between governments to which their respective peoples have not been persuaded.... [It was also clear] that no day-to-day efforts at producing conviction could be successful unless they could rely on the existence of a substratum of common under- standing and values. The achievement of this in turn could be hoped for only from a program which sought not to manipulate the minds of friendly nations toward American ends, but which, out of "a decent respect to the opinions of mankind," aimed to hold clearly before the world principles of universal validity, deserving the assent of other nations and their full associa- tion in seeking common goals. The truths on which such a structure of uni- versal belief and purpose could be erected were no longer so few or so self-evident as they were in 1776, and successful persuasion of lasting kind today required extensive and candid com- munication between peoples on very complex questions of ideology. It was also obvious that books were one of the few competent vehicles for this necessary commerce of ideas, and that any successful program would require their wise and skillful use.4 Ibid., p. 168.