"The Visible College" LING HWEY JENG, EDITOR Facilitating Classroom Discussion on Diversity Editor's Note: Diversity deserves more attention in library and information science (LIS) education, yet it is also one of the most difficult topics to deal with in the classroom. This is the fourth in the series of articles that address the teaching of special topics in LIS. Having been unable to find a willing author to address diversity education for this column, I've decided to write one myself. My credential on this topic? For two years, I played a leading role in establishing an affirmative action/equal opportunity policy for the College of Communications and Information Studies at the University of Kentucky. I also lecture on diversity in our school.1 There has been a limited amount of writing on diversity in the past few years; writers have included Josey, Pe- terson, and Welburn.2 An entire issue of Reference Librarian is dedicated to the topic. Cultural diversity has also been an issue for more than a decade in our field, evident in the frequent discus- sions of minority recruitment among practitioners in the field, and faculty and students in LIS education programs. Yet according to the recent statis- tics cited by American Library Associa- tion Executive Director Elizabeth Martinez, in her proposal entitled "Spectrum Initiative," ethnic minori- ties make up 26 percent of the U.S. population, but comprised only 10.5 percent of LIS graduates in 1992-95. 3 Recent studies also show that the white majority accounted for 87.8 percent of academic and public librarians in 1991, an insignificant decrease from 88.2 per- cent in 1981. If this lack of progress in the last decade is any indication, then LIS educators have to be given a failing grade in diversity education. Why the failure? What is missing in the educa- tional pedagogy that would have helped? Welburn hints at the missing link in diversity education in LIS when he discusses the three important consid- erations to teaching cultural diversity: (a) the need for rethinking the curricu- lum at large, (b) the trifold concept of linkages between the multicultural contexts of information, its users, and information providers, and (c) the nec- essary distinction between diversity as a workplace issue and diversity as a service issue.4 What fails in LIS diver- sity education could be summarized as the disconnection between diversity as an academic topic on the one hand, and the real life of library and information services and its people, both the providers and the users, on the other. One could present population changes among minority groups, but population is abstract whereas our library users are real. An instructor could discuss dis- 334 Volume 38, Number 4
"The Visible College" 335 crimination and social injustice and yet leave students with the impres- sion that they do not exist in libraries. Diversity education without a con- crete connection to LIS services and people inevitably provides students with nice concepts, but with no context in which to apply them. Diversity represents an increas- ingly important facet of discussion in most academic topics. It is as essential as the facets of history, ethics, and poli- tics in all academic disciplines. Teach- ing diversity requires changing the attitude of individuals in the class- room. Diversity should not be taught as an academic topic with merely a list of scholarly readings and lectures on race theory and feminist scholarship. Dis- cussions of diversity in the classroom make little impact unless conducted with proper consideration and integra- tion of the social, cultural, and politi- cal aspects of LIS life. What needs to be covered in diver- sity lectures? There are social issues that need to be discussed (discrimina- tion and population migration), politi- cal agendas to be debated (affirmative action, immigration restriction, and welfare reform) , and basic concepts to be addressed (stereotyping, proportional representation, and nativism). A good pedagogy to establish the missing link in the classroom between diversity lectures and the LIS life is the "scenario" approach: to present spe- cific scenarios that could happen to individual librarians in real libraries. Each scenario addresses a specific is- sue related to diversity. There is no perfect answer for the scenario, so find- ing the perfect answer is not as impor- tant during classroom discussion as illustrating and discussing the com- plexity of the issue. The rest of this article presents six scenarios with an- notation on the issues they are de- signed to address. Students need to be aware that descriptions in these sce- narios are somewhat polarized versions of real-world cases which are often more subtle. The instructor needs to explain that, at times, potentially offen- sive words and descriptions are used to present the scenarios. This is done with the sole intention of eliciting classroom discussion on diversity. Scenario One: Proportional Representation A user of your library questions why only 3 percent of the library book budget is allocated to Hispanic materials when His panics account for 12 percent of the population in the local community Central to this scenario is the con- cept of proportional representation, which has long been used in argu- ments related to equality. In a perfect world where all people are created equal and given equal opportunities, there should exist equal chance of suc- ceeding among groups in all aspects of life. To accept the argument of propor- tional representation, students must appreciate the validity of normal dis- tribution in statistics. The theory of normal distribution ensures, on statis- tical ground, that the representation among groups in employment, promo- tion, college admission, athletic scholarship, etc., should be near the proportion of the groups' population in the society. In reality, normal distri- bution rarely occurs with statistical precision, and proportional repre- sentation remains a far-reaching goal. The lack of proportional repre- sentation could be, and has been in many cases, considered a form of dis- crimination. To correct discrimina- tion due to a lack of proportional representation, one must examine the root causes of the problem. Simply in- creasing the Hispanic material budget Fall 1997
336 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science to 12 percent, not an uncommon solu- tion, without carefully considering the causes of the disparity is counterpro- ductive and could more likely elicit re- sentment from those groups who lost the material budget to reallocation. Scenario Two: Minority Recruitment Who should be hired for a branch public library situated in a predominantly Af- rican-American community? Minority recruitment is probably the most widely proposed solution to promote diversity. Many employers as- sume that it's best to have a minority community served by one of its own. Based on that logic, most would suggest that it's better to hire an African- Ameri- can librarian to serve a predominantly African-American community. This, however, sometimes creates a problem of racial and social segregation. Stu- dents must be made aware that increas- ing the number of minority librarians and integrating minority culture and majority culture are two separate, though closely related, goals. One ob- jective will not succeed without efforts to achieve the other. The issue here is to find the best way to increase minority recruitment and at the same time inte- grate minority and majority groups. To hire minority workers to serve the mi- nority community, although it may help improve minority recruitment, does not in itself promote diversity and cultural integration. Scenario Three: Stereotypes A small group of black students seem to always come to the library together, gather in a corner, talk, and giggle for more than an hour before leaving to- gether. Should the librarian find out what they are doing and keep an eye on them to make sure that they are not plot- ting something bad? When this scenario was read in the classroom most students recognized it as blatant discrimination immediately. Yet anecdotes exist where library secu- rity guards are called upon to deal with groups of people with whom the librar- ian feels uncomfortable. Groups that cause the librarian's discomfort include people of different characteristics, who are at times perceived as "problem pa- trons." They may be teenagers, African- Americans, foreign students, homeless, mothers with young children, or eld- erly. Students need to be aware that lack of understanding is often the cause of the fear that is the primary cause of discrimination. They need to be encour- aged to think of all possible causes of such fear, and to develop strategies for understanding the needs of the unfamil- iar groups and for overcoming their own discomfort. An equally important issue in this scenario is the concept of stereo- typing and some common stereotypes of specific racial groups. The use of blacks in this scenario provides an opportu- nity for students to discuss recent stud- ies on social bias that reinforce racial stereotypes, such as the study done by Shanto Iyengar, a professor at UCLA, on how bias in television crime reports af- fect the viewers' stereotypes of African- Americans. Scenario Four: The English-Only Policy The bibliographic instruction librarian was told he violated the English-only policy by speaking Korean during his lunch break to some new Korean foreign students in an effort to help them become oriented to the new academic environment. At least twenty- two states in the U.S. Volume 38, Number 4
The V7s/b/e College" 337 have official language laws defining English as the official language of the state. The Republican Congress of 1995 also proposed and debated several Eng- lish-only bills, although none were passed. When legislated, the English- only law declares English as the official language and the language mandated in government-related business. The re- strictive nature of the law varies from one state to another. States with more restrictive laws may prohibit the use of non-English languages in election bal- lots, driver's license testing, courtroom proceedings, and even stipulate a pen- alty for governmental employees who conduct official business in languages other than English. The law could fur- ther restrict or prohibit public funding for bilingual studies at schools and in adult literacy programs. The American Library Association has, at times, op- posed the English-only legislation, es- pecially when public funding for bilingual and literacy education is af- fected. A library employee in a state with an English-only law must be aware of the law and the limits of the law. She must learn to identify and deal with potential abuses of the law, and be pro- tective of her own rights in the work- place in serving users of different languages and cultures. Scenario Five: Affirmative Action Librarian Rumor has it that the new black librar- ian was hired as the result of pressure from the central office to fill the affirm- ative action quota. Several of your col- leagues have commented that he graduated from Clark Atlanta, doesn't speak standard English, is not familiar with the library collection, and doesn't seem very friendly to the users. After decades of implementation, affirmative action policy is the target of frequent attacks around the country in the 1990s. The court recently ruled against the use of race as a criterion in university admissions in Texas. The Board of Regents of the University of California (UC) dismantled the use of affirmative action policies for the UC systems. When implemented, the pas- sage of Proposition 209 in California will prohibit the state government from using race and gender in awarding funding and contracts. Critics often cite quotas and race preferences in the workplace as the evils of affirmative action, and demand the return of "merit based" evaluation as the sole method of making decisions in hiring and promot- ing. Supporters of affirmative action cite the historical injustice and social disparity of minority groups as evi- dence of the continuing need for af- firmative action. Amidst the polarized political and social debates, it is es- sential for students to discuss the his- torical development, implementation, and abuses of the policy within the past few decades, and some funda- mental concepts related to affirmative action, including the basic notion of equal opportunity, the quantitative versus qualitative ability evaluation, the social and cultural qualifications in recruitment, and the issue of reten- tion efforts following recruitment. Furthermore, this scenario also illus- trates how the lack of understanding of the policy could arouse public prejudice against certain groups in the workplace. Scenario Six: The Immigrant's Accent A user complained "that ignorant per- son who barely spoke English should not be at the reference desk and should go back to where she came from," be- cause the reference librarian told him Fall 1997
338 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science she needed a few minutes to find out the exact spelling of the name of the foot- ball coach. Discussions on diversity cannot be complete without a thorough examina- tion of immigration and its related poli- tics. Immigrants contribute many labor and economic benefits to the adopted country. Immigrants of different back- grounds also bring new cultural per- spectives to the society. Immigration presents little threat to the society when the new immigrants and the existing majority share the same race, language, and cultural heritage. However, when new immigrants do not share the same heritage with the existing majority population, they are often perceived as inferior and a threat to the society. This is evident in numerous studies, such as the one by Brigham in 1923 in which Polish and Italian immigrants were de- clared as inferior to English immi- grants,5 and the 1994 study by Herrnstein and Murray, who concluded that early immigrants at the turn of the century were smarter than recent immi- grants.6 In discussing the issues of im- migration and discrimination against immigrants, it is essential for students to debate the close relationship between legislative efforts on immigration re- form and the social attitudes toward and against immigrants throughout American history. References 1. The complete outlines of the author's lec- ture on diversity is available on her home page at URL: http://www.uky.edu/ -lhjengOO/ diversity. 2. For examples, EJ. Josey, "The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Students From Diverse Backgrounds," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34 (Fall 1993): 302-11; Lorna Peterson, "Teaching the Practitioners: One Professor's At- tempt at Library Education and Sensitiv- ity to Multicultural Diversity," Reference Librarian 45/46 (1994): 23-38; William C. Welburn, "Moving Beyond Cliche: Cul- tural Diversity and the Curriculum in Li- brary and Information Studies," Public & Access Services Quarterly 1 (1995): 97- 100. 3. Elizabeth Martinez, "Diversity: the Twenty-First Century Spectrum," Ameri- can Libraries 28 (Mar. 1997): 32. 4. William C. Welburn, "Do We Really Need Cultural Diversity in the Library and In- formation Science Curriculum?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35 (Fall 1994): 328-30. 5. Carl L. Brigham, A btudy of American Intelligence (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Pr., 1923). 6. Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life (New York: Free Press, 1994). Educators and library school students who would like to write about teaching methodology, abstract articles, or com- ment on specific teaching methods are in- vited to send their contributions to Ling Hwey Jeng, Associate Professor, School of Library and Information Science, Univer- sity of Kentucky, 502 King Library South, Lexington, KY 40506-0039. Contributions should be one thousand to fifteen hundred words. Volume 38, Number 4