CORRESPONDENCE To the Editor: There is no validity to Lorna Peterson's thoroughly negative review of Lee Shiflett's Louis Shores: Defining Educational Leadership (Library Quarterly 67 [October 1997]: 403-5). Central to the critique is her belief that "What we understand about librarianship from this work remains open, for this biography is the chronicling of a life, not an interpretation.... Lee Shiflett packs his work with details but does not apply imagination or explanation to them." A few years ago I asked Sir Martin Gilbert, the primary author of the multivolume biography of Winston Churchill, how he felt when his critics called him a "chronicler." He laughed and said he considered it a compliment. He could well have added that biography and history are in the details. In this masterfully written book, Shiflett relates the facts and lets Shores, his work, his environment, and his impact on the profession reveal themselves. I believe that Peterson displays her inability to apprehend this when she writes, "Throughout the book, Shiflett presents enough examples from Shores's life to suggest that he was an opportunistic, pushy, egotistical, eccentric man prone to exaggeration. But Shiflett won't say this." Precisely! Shiflett doesn't need to. He is an excellent writer-perhaps the best in our field-and he does not have to belabor his findings. He respects his readers; it would be a shame if this proves to be a miscalculation on his part. (It is significant that the reviewer does not note that this biography also shows Louis Shores to be idealistic, courageous, innovative, and highly productive.) One of the corollaries of Peterson's essential charge is this: "Nor is this a work that interprets Shores's life psychologically." In fact, Shiflett expertly allows the turbulent emotions of his biographee concerning his Jewishness, his belief in the paranormal, and other subjects to become manifest through well-chosen quotes from his fiction and personal letters. Apparently, Peterson has missed all this. She complains, "Shiflett rarely comments on personality or character flaws and virtues. . . . The blandness of neutrality make the reader long for interpretation." It is not interpretation which Peterson seems to yearn for, it is judgment. Similarly, she charges that Shores' life is not put into "sound context" and there- fore Shiflett denies readers a "historical interpretation" of Shores. In fact, Shores' environment is consistently described in detail. However, Peterson does not believe that "social context" means particular places, people, and situations, but rather sociological, psychological, and cultural generalizations like "urbanization, indus- trialization, and the prejudices, fears, and hopes of the age." While social and cul- tural history predominate in academia these days, some still prefer scholarship that sticks close to the facts and does not make grandiose pronouncements based on limited data. 121
122 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY One example of the supposed lack of social context is the alleged "insensitivity to the racial context of Shores's life where, again, facts spill forth without meaning and significance." Both Shores and Shiflett get a failing grade on the now obligatory race and gender report card. Alas, despite a chapter titled "White Man," which details the racism in American librarianship, Shores' feelings about bigotry and the difficulties of being a northern Jew at a southern African-American university where he is championing library services to-and library education for-blacks, Peterson is displeased: "Shores's race and gender privilege, allowing for his appointment (in 1928) as director of the black college, Fisk, is not analyzed." Moreover, she indicts the biographer for not identifying the race of some of Shores' colleagues. Professor Shiflett will obviously have to install a highly sensitive race/gender checker on his word processing program. A short time ago, Peterson wrote that "Shores' life of color and gender privilege would make for a provocative and interesting sociological biography and contribute to the understanding of the salience of race in American librarianship." (Lorna Peterson, "Alternative Perspectives in Library and Information Science: Issues of Race," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37 [Spring 1996]: 167. Incidentally, one could fault Peterson for failing to chant the entire mantra: "Race, gender and class.") Shiflett's view of Shores is much broader, complex, and signifi- cant: he sees an individual human being. Not being the book she wanted, this biog- raphy was doomed from the very beginning in the hands of the ultimate person of privilege in academia-the book reviewer. This biography of one of the most colorful and significant members of our profes- sion serves its subject and readers well. Despite Peterson's statements to the con- trary, one is shown how Louis Shores was involved in scores of different aspects of the profession and given a sense of his enormous impact-some of it easily dis- cerned and delineated, some not. Carefully researched and beautifully written, it manages to be both illuminating and enjoyable. This is not only a good read, but at $36 for over three hundred pages, in today's market it is a good buy. Stephen Karetzky Library Director, Felician College Library