BROADENING CONCERNS FOR INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM EVERETT T. MOORE PERHAPS we librarians, pragmatists that we are, have not been very successful at defining "intellectu- al freedom." We have been concerned largely with the practical problems that face us when our policies of book selec- tion or our principles of access to books and libraries are questioned from with- out. Perhaps we have appeared to react hypersensitively to such questionings and to be too ready to consider them "attacks" on our professional abilities or prerogatives. Perhaps we have been touchy over the question of where book selection ends and censorship begins. Perhaps we have seemed self-righteous and lofty when we have stood on our rights and quoted the Library Bill of Rights as our scripture. Whatever the causes for such an image" as may have developed in the public mind, this is a good time to con- sider how we may overcome it-not by seeking to change our visage in Madison Avenue fashion, but by probing more thoroughly into what our concerns are, wherever they touch on our "intellectual freedom." Does the expression "intellectual free- dom" offend? Is it snobbish? When we use it does it wall us off from many of the very people to whom we want to en- dear ourselves? Are government offi- cials, legislators, community leaders put off by such a high-sounding term? We have asked these questions among ourselves and among our friends, over and over. They have bothered some of us deeply, for there is no question but that the very invoking of principles of intellectual freedom has offended some of those people whom we should be doing everything in our power to reach. And so there have been frequent urgings that we "come down to earth" and give up referring to our intellectual freedom, as if we were some superior breed, and that we employ the language of the market place as more fitting to our interest in serving all manner of people, not just the intellectuals. If we are wor- ried about censorship, then let's talk about censorship and not beat about the bush. Why wave the red flag of intel- lectualism in the faces of some of our best friends? Commendable as it is to call a spade a spade, this is far from the mark, for we are of course not concerned only with censorship but with a broad range of matters affecting our freedom to act and to fulfil our responsibilities as li- brarians according to our lights. We need to look more fully into what ought to be included in our concept of intel- lectual freedom. Because keeping the printed word is the main business of librarians, we are naturally and properly perturbed about any placing of power in the hands of officials to restrict our freedom to select books and other materials for our li- braries. The wielding of such power is censorship, as traditionally defined, and a healthy fear of the censor is something we like to think has been bred into us not only as librarians but as good citi- zens. True, we are sometimes advised that every time we select or reject a book we exercise censorship. It does not 309
310 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY satisfy those who so advise to say that our intentions are not to exert moral or political judgment over what our library should or should not have but to select within the limits of our budgets what we believe will best serve the needs and broadest interests of our readers. Too much, it may seem, is left to our human judgment, frail as it sometimes is. But once confidence has been im- posed in us by those who employ us, is there any other way reasonably to fulfil professional duties? Where confidence is lacking, the urge to censor takes hold. It is true also that in an earlier time some of our library leaders saw them- selves as censors-as guardians of morals and therefore as having an obli- gation to reject whatever appeared harmful for readers to read. That was the position of the president of the American Library Association, Arthur E. Bostwick, in 1908, when he said that the librarian must shun the "books that distinctly commend what is wrong, that teach how to sin and how pleasant sin is." Not all subjects, he thought, were fit for fiction (though the French seemed to have been acting upon such a thesis). Mr. Bostwick had been wrest- ling with the "canons of decency" of his times and had had some sleepless nights over them, "not only because they are so frequently confounded with canons of morality, but because ... they are arbi- trary and variable." For some time now we have rejected any thought that we should exercise moral judgment in the selection of books. Quite representative of our domi- nant viewpoint today is the statement made to the press by a librarian defend- ing her recommendation not to buy Nor- man Mailer's novel, Why Are We in Vietnam? She had to explain carefully that it was not because of the author's use of "obscene" language, or his polit- ical views, but because she considered it ''a very poor book . . . badly written, boring, repetitious, and of no discernible literary or social value." This librarian did not shy away from exercising judg- ment on literary grounds. She disowned any intent to judge on the basis of pos- sible offense to moral sensitivities or political viewpoint. Certainly this is not the view of every librarian in the United States. There are those who feel that the library profes- sion in general and the ALA in particu- lar have gone astray in their stand on intellectual freedom. They do not be- lieve that librarians should give young people free access to certain materials in the library. They do not welcome the broadening of the Library Bill of Rights to read that "the rights of an individual to the use of a library should not be denied because of his age, race, religion, national origin, or social or political views," as was accepted by the ALA in 1967. The question of whether some materials may be harmful to readers, particularly to minors, is still an open one and is even now undergoing official study by the Commission on Obscenity and Pornography created by an act of the Ninetieth Congress. The viewpoint of the dissenters is given some support by the ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court on April 22, 1968, upholding a New York State law that regulates the sale of "harmful" books, magazines, photographs, and other ma- terials to minors under the age of seven- teen. "The power of the state to control the conduct of children reaches beyond the scope of its authority over adults," Justice William J. Brennan said, speak- ing for the majority. But Justice Wil- liam 0. Douglas, a dissenter from the decision, believes that the court has set
BROADENING CONCERNS FOR INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 311 itself up as "the nation's board of cen- sors.... I do not know of any group in the country less qualified, first, to know what obscenity is when they see it, and, second, to have any considered judg- ment as to what the deleterious or bene- ficial impact of a particular publication may have on minds of young or old." Justice Brennan observed that al- though studies had not demonstrated a "causal link" between obscene material and the impairment of a youth's ethical and moral development, a "causal link has not been disproved either." The ar- gument continues, therefore, over the question of what harmful effects there may be for young people in literature containing obscene material. Concerning the librarian's obligation to provide books considered "contro- versial" because of their, obscenity or pornography, we are perhaps reaching a more reasonable position than was possible only a few years ago. Then, de- bates raged over the legality of distribu- tion of some works deemed by most reputable critics to have merit and value (Lady Chatterley's Lover; Tropic of Cancer; Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure). Freed significantly from the need to fight literary censorship, librar- ians are recognizing the necessity-and the privilege-of basing selection on critical judgment rather than on satis- faction of popular demand. Kathleen Molz's comment concerning books "de- signed to meet the needs of the biblio- voyeur" (Candy; Story of 0) is apt. "That those desiring such entertainment should be left free to obtain it, there should be no question, but it does not lie within the responsibility of a public library to indulge every vagary of hu- man taste. Nor should the rejection of these books or others of like ilk lead to any inference that the librarian is acting in this regard as a censor.... To raise the hue and cry of intellectual freedom over every title rejected by a library be- comes in the long run merely ridiculous, since, by its very nature, intellectual freedom protects the right of choice, whether it be wise or faulty."' When the judgment of the librarian is called into question concerning such a book as Why Are We in Vietnam? he can pretty well expect to be damned whichever way he turns. Although he may reject it on honest grounds, and make a straightforward defense of his action (as did the librarian mentioned previously), it may also be argued (as the Washington Post did) that because it is by Norman Mailer, this "automati- cally makes the book a literary event, meaning it should be available to the public regardless of what the librarians think." When a number of reputable re- viewers around the country praise it (as they have the Mailer book), this argu- ment is greatly strengthened. And so the librarian needs to remain flexible, to the point of changing his mind about pur- chasing, if not about the value of the book itself. In spite of a vastly improved climate in the United States for the publication and acceptance of literature which only a short time ago was considered unpub- lishable and unacceptable, librarians in many communities are having to step cautiously so as not to offend those guardians of public morals who appar- ently want nothing more racy in their libraries than the World Almanac. It is ludicrous that a community can be thrown into turmoil over the antics of a public library trustee such as the gentleman in Farmingdale, Long Island, 1 Kathleen Molz, "The Public Custody of the High Pornography," American Scholar (Winter, 1966-67), 36:101-2.
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY whose confiscation of a copy of Paris Review from the library was a kind of gesture of contempt that accompanied his systematic harassment and intimida- tion of the library staff and his obstruct- ing of all plans for development of the library. It is tragic that librarians should be so involved in this kind of wasteful struggle when the times de- mand more and more involvement in efforts to solve the serious social prob- lems that face the country. The most severe test of our commit- ment to intellectual freedom is likely to come in the near future, if it is not al- ready on us, when libraries will surely become concerned more than ever with the issues of the social revolution we are undergoing. Those who fear social change already fear the library. But it is usually a vague, uncomprehending fear of ideas-a feeling that people in general cannot safely be turned loose in this jungle of dangerous thoughts. This has been demonstrated mainly in the denunciations of librarians by right- wing extremists for what they consider deliberate favoring of left-wing view- points in their book selection policies. With a propensity for reducing political and social concepts to simple black or white, the right wingers have condemned librarians in communities from the At- lantic to the Pacific for selecting the writings of "liberal" authors over those of "conservatives," for failing to give a fair hearing to the ideas and principles of "free enterprise" as opposed to those of "socialism" or "big-government-ism." They have suspected that librarians have been captured by the left-wing forces, which gain a better hearing be- cause they control the big-city press, the major publishing houses, and most of the national magazines of news and opinion. Major battles fought along this line in a number of communities have illus- trated the fears that build up in people's minds when they believe a library is de- liberately refusing to represent their viewpoint in the books and magazines they select. Perhaps the most thorough answer to this charge of bias was given in the case of the Long Beach, Cali- fornia, Public Library, where the li- brarian was able to demonstrate in pub- lic hearing, to the satisfaction of the City Council, at least, that a conscien- tious policy of attention to a broad range of interests and viewpoints, from left to right, liberal to conservative, non- conformist to conformist, or whatever pairing of poles one may propose, had been followed in selecting materials. No one claims this to be an easy task. Robert H. Muller has recently shown in his publication, From Radical Left to Extreme Right,2 how extensive and di- verse is the periodical literature of "pro- test, controversy, or dissent" in the United States. John N. Berry had pre- viously found, through questioning 120 public libraries, a striking lack of repre- sentation of a sampling of extremist publications in their collections and an apparent unconcern for making them available to their readers.3 He concluded that public libraries were clinging cau- tiously to "the middle of the road" in their selection policies with respect to these out-of-the-ordinary publications. Both Mr. Berry and Mr. Muller point out the obligation librarians have to pro- vide such materials if the library is truly to be a forum for dissenting views. Mul- ler's bibliography, meticulously and 2 Robert H. Muller (ed.), From Radical Left to Extreme Right: Current Periodicals of Protest, Controversy, or Dissent-U.S.A. (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Campus Publishers, 1967). 3 John N. Berry III, "Demand for Dissent?" Li- brary Journal (October 15, 1964), 15:3917.
BROADENING CONCERNS FOR INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 313 thoroughly compiled, with admirably objective annotations (as acknowledged even by most of the publishers of the periodicals themselves, for all o.f them had been given an opportunity to com- ment on their accuracy and fairness), was designed to help librarians in the task of selecting such materials, "so that they can proceed, as they see fit, to create an awareness by the public of the existence of propagandistic or polemic periodicals expressing dissident, opposi- tion, or minority opinion." It is an in- valuable and timely publication. Controversy, protest, dissent are the order of the day, particularly on our campuses. Many of the rules of the game, as we have traditionally under- stood the game, are being ignored. Public officials and private observers alike- even the most eminent ones-are finding it hard to be heard if they express un- popular views. They get shouted down, booed at, or walked out on with regular- ity. Passions have become so hot over the issues of war in Vietnam, civil rights, educational policy, taxes, and a host of other issues that demonstrations, camp-ins, riots seem to many the only way to give vent to feelings of frustra- tion and anger. Where does the library, keeper of all the ideas that have been recorded over the ages-safe or dangerous, conserva- tive or radical, progressive or reaction- ary, cautious or revolutionary, fanciful or plodding-belong in this state of affairs? "The library is neutral," we often say. But this does not satisfy some who say that no one can be truly neu- tral, any more than can a government or any institution. This is technically true, of course, but the objective of librarians to give fair representation to all view- points and all manner of ideas is basic with us. We have been critical of the Soviet Union's concept of the responsibility of public libraries in the U.S.S.R. for open- ly and actively promoting the socialist way of life. Public libraries, we have in- sisted, should not engage in teaching or propagandizing for a cause or an ideol- ogy. But, for all our professions, we do not appear to our cousins from the U.S.S.R. to have kept clear of bias our- selves. Several years ago, when a delega- tion of four Soviet librarians visited the United States, they deplored the preva- lence, as they saw it, of a propagating of bourgeois ideology in our public li- braries. They thought that an analysis of bibliographies of recommended lit- erature published by large public li- braries showed that they served the pur- pose of promoting "the American way of life." "They serve to bring to the reader extreme reactionary literature causing the American inhabitant to fear the 'Communist threat' allegedly threaten- ing the USA from the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. Many bibliog- raphies of recommended texts are pub- lished also for children and young peo- ple. They, also, are saturated with lit- erature that propagates bourgeois ideol- ogy and conducts active anti-Commu- nist, anti-Soviet propaganda," they re- ported.4 The library will probably always have such criticism from the left and from the right. It may be a good sign that neither side can ever be fully satis- fied that its views are being adequately represented. Human failings, budgetary weaknesses, imperfections in library operations will always make it difficult to achieve a perfect balance. The library which broadens its scope ' N. F. Gavrilov and I. Iu. Bagrova, "Libraries in the USA; an Official Report," ALA Bulletin (April, 1963), 57:341.
314 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to include such community facilities as lecture halls may come in for criticism over who is to be heard and what groups are to be permitted to use the halls. Fear of free expression or free assembly sometimes cause strange restrictions to be imposed. In Burbank, California, city officials overruled the permission granted to the American Civil Liberties Union by the city librarian to hold a meeting there, because it was a "contro- versial" group. When a local court ruled such refusal was an unconstitutional limit on free speech, and a denial of due process because no reasonable standards had been set for use of such public fa- cilities, the officials made a new rule limiting use of the hall to "cultural" programs, thus eliminating the ACLU as an eligible group. For somewhat dif- ferent motives, but apparently with the same disregard for the rights of free assembly, library authorities in Phila- delphia, Wilmington (Delaware), and McLean (Virginia) were reported this year to have refused permission to mem- bers of the John Birch Society to use lecture-hall facilities for programs. The objections were that political activities were not allowed on library property. Achievement of the happy medium continues to elude us. Ten years ago we deplored the "quiet generation" of young people in college and university and their unconcern for political and so- cial issues. Today we deplore the ex- cesses to which a lively concern for these matters sometimes leads them. But to- day, at least, we can see that the library has an extraordinary opportunity to make known to the awakened minds and senses of young people that it is in- deed the repository for ideas and for the materials that must go into the building of sounder, more progressive, more humane institutions. As keepers both of what is traditionally of value and what is currently important, libraries can help mightily to insure that "due process of thought" (as Morris Ernst has phrased it) is brought to bear on the solving of our social problems. Many librarians are stretching them- selves to make their books and services better available and more accessible to people who have lacked advantages of education and healthy environment. And just as colleges and universities are having to take energetic and unconven- tional steps to enable capable young- sters from disadvantaged minority groups to qualify for entrance, so li- braries are undertaking sometimes un- conventional programs to make their services more useful and meaningful to the disadvantaged people in our cities. Development of a kind of community service that is geared deliberately to the interests of people who have not tradi- tionally been drawn to libraries, but who may nevertheless find much of value there, has become a major con- cern of our great urban libraries. Access to books and libraries, access to learning, access to ideas: these are as much the concern of librarians commit- ted to intellectual freedom as the de- fense of readers against censorship. Any definition of intellectual freedom will have to be broad enough to take in these concerns as well.