Profiles in Retention Part 1 : Design Characteristics of a Graduate Synchronous Online Program Elizabeth Aversa and Steven MacCall School of Library & Information Studies, The University of Alabama, Box 870252, Tuscaloosa, AL, 35487-0252. Email: (eaversa, smaccall}@slis. ua.edu This paper is a case study of a Master of Library and Information Studies degree program online option that has been unusually successful in retaining and graduating students. Design characteristics of this program that has maintained a retention rate of over 90 percent over five years are described and mapped to the literature on distance educa- tion published after its implementation. The paper reports that characteristics identified in the practical and theoretical literatures are the same as, or closely related to, the characteristics of the program described. Student transcripts were used to track reten- tion and time-to-completion. Topics for continuing study are identified and described. This is the first of two papers on retention in distance learning programs. The present paper (Part 1) addresses program design and implementation; Part 2 focuses on student responses to the online program option as they relate to student learning styles and outcomes. Keywords: LIS education, online learning, online education, distance education, stu- dent retention, enrollment attrition, program administration, student support services, case study Introduction This tive is case the first study of and two a papers, survey, a descrip- that in- tive case study and a survey, that in- vestigate the design characteristics of the synchronous online M LIS program op- tion at the University of Alabama School of Library and Information Studies (UA SLIS) and its unusual success in retaining students to completion of degree program. As shown below, it has been reported for more than a dozen years that retention rates for distance education programs are lower than for programs in which instruc- tion is delivered face-to-face. The UA Master of Library and Information Stud- ies (MLIS) online program option is a 36-hour cohort-based option, drawing stu- dents from across North America, that has maintained a student retention rate after one year of greater than 90 percent and an overall graduation rate of greater than 90 percent over its first five successive enter- ing classes. This paper is structured as follows. After reviewing the relevant literature, we provide a general description of the design char- acteristics of the U A MLIS online degree program option. In the Methods section, we describe the rationale for the methods em- ployed and the steps for collecting retention data from the transcripts of 216 students who enrolled between 2005 and 2009. We determined retention rates at the half-way point for completion (after one year) and at the graduation point (after 2 years) for the first five years of the program's existence. In the final sections, we present findings and compare characteristics of the UA MLIS program with characteristics that the research literature identifies as related to high retention rates. Finally, we provide a preview of Part 2 of the study and suggest questions that remain to be explored. J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 54, No. 2 - (Spring) April 2013 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2013 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 47
148 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Review of Existing Research Retention of students in online education- al programs has been the subject of numer- ous reports sincc the first online classes were taught in the early 1990s. There appears to be no clear retention or attrition rate for all programs, and the statistics are confounded by the number and types of programs stud- ied (Perry, Boman, Care, Edwards, & Park, 2008). It has been established, through stud- ies at several colleges, that attrition rates have been 1 0 to 30 percent higher for cours- es delivered online than for those delivered face-to-face (Carr, 2000). Throughout the decade from 2000 to 2010, dropout rates for online classes and programs were reported to range between 20 and 70 percent in secondary, undergrad- uate, continuing professional, and graduate courses in a wide range of disciplines (An- gelo, Williams, & Natvig, 2007; Carr, 2000; Long, 2009; Tyler-Smith 2006). It must be recognized, of course, that attrition occurs among both online and face-to-face stu- dent populations: the Canadian Association of Graduate Schools (2004), for example, reported attrition rates for graduate degree programs (masters and doctoral levels) to range between 1 9 and 46 percent regardless of how instruction was delivered. Reports of retention rates higher than 90 percent are not evident in the recent lit- erature. While there are many prescriptive recommendations ("how to retain online students") based on best practice and sur- vey results reporting "why students stayed or left" their online classes or programs, few reports link a broad range or cluster of specific program attributes to higher re- tention rates. We report here that the com- bined design and implementation of the online program option at the UA SLIS is associated with the high rate of retention the program has enjoyed, and the literature strongly supports this view. UA SLIS Online Program Overview The UA MLIS online program option was implemented beginning with the Au- gust 2005 fall semester. The aim of the online option was to provide extended geographical access to the 36-semester- hour program leading to the MLIS for students unable to move to the Tusca- loosa campus or to commute to the Uni- versity's extension campus in Gadsden, Alabama. The program was regarded as a natural progression from both travelling courses introduced early in the School's history and two-way compressed video classes delivered to remote sites in the 1 990s and early 2000s. The faculty decid- ed that a real-time, two-way Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) instructional de- livery mode would be the online program option best suited to the prevailing UA SLIS culture. A synchronous two-way VoIP program was supported by the Uni- versity through its College of Continu- ing Studies, which has a long history of expertise in innovative educational out- reach and provides advice and support that includes the financial modeling that provided for both an affordable educa- tion for students and fiscal benefit to UA SLIS. After a year of planning and re- cruitment, the School launched its first student cohort of 45 students in August 2005 using Wimba Live Classroom™ integrated into Blackboard Vista™ for web-based course support. Primary contacts with prospective and admitted students were handled through the program director; the assistant to the director, a professional staff member re- sponsible for student services at UA SLIS; and the distance education coordinator, a faculty member compensated for this part- time administrative service. The online study option was designed to serve part- time adult graduate students who would complete two online courses each term over six semesters, including summers, to earn the degree in two calendar years. Given the high retention rate of the UA SLIS online program option, what attri- butes of this program could be linked to this retention rate?
Profiles in Retention Part 1 149 Methods This is a descriptive case study. The case study has been used in LIS to in- vestigate, describe and explain reference services (Lawson, 1968), the closing of library education programs (Paris, 1988), and knowledge utilization (Yin, 1981). We chose a single case design rather than a multiple approach because this research opportunity appeared to the authors to rep- resent an extreme or unique situation that would benefit from a method appropriate "to describe a situation (e.g., a case histo- ry) or to test explanations for why specific events have occurred" (Yin, 1981, p. 98). The case being examined is the UA SLIS online program option as designed and implemented and the context is the distance learning community broadly de- fined. The data were derived from archival and administrative records: descriptions of program attributes and activities came from archival material and current practice while retention rates and time-to-degree for students enrolled in the program were taken from student transcripts. In Part 2 of the study, individual learner attitudes and outcomes are examined through a survey of students and graduates. Part 1 of this study was not submitted to the University's Institutional Review Board (IRB) since data were aggregated and did not directly involve human sub- jects. Part 2 of the study, based on a sur- vey, has been reviewed and approved by IRB. To establish accurate retention rates for the program, transcripts for a population of 216 students who entered the online M LIS degree option between August 2005 and September 2009 were examined. The ob- jective was to determine whether students completed the program and when they graduated; or to determine, for those who did not remain in program, the length of time students were enrolled before leaving. Graduation years were recorded, as were the dates when students either formally withdrew or ceased enrolling. Students who left the program were categorized as "early leavers" if they failed to complete the first academic year (two semesters or 1 2 semester hours of credit) or "late leav- ers" if they dropped out after completing the first two semesters or the equivalent. Since six years of academic enrollment is permitted for pursuit of the degree, some students who entered in the period 2006- 2009 are still enrolled in classes or are in continual contact with their advisors about continuing. They are counted among the "retained" or "active" students as of Janu- ary 1, 2012. Having confirmation that the retention and graduation rates were indeed very high, the next step was undertaken: a de- tailed articulation of program attributes and activities. This step involved outlin- ing, categorizing, and describing the attri- butes of the high retention program under investigation. To identify program charac- teristics that had been associated with stu- dent retention elsewhere, a search of the literature of attrition, retention, and over- all success of online degree programs was conducted. Program attributes associated with retention were identified, regardless of having been empirically or theoretically derived. Because evaluations of online programs were just beginning to be report- ed, the literature reviewed was published during the period in which the UA SLIS online program option was being designed and delivered to the first five cohorts. Finally, UA SLIS program attributes were compared with those reported in the literature. Program characteristics not mentioned in the literature were also iden- tified and aspects for additional study were suggested. Designed Attributes of the UA SLIS Online Program Recruitment The initial recruitment goal was to es- tablish a pool that would yield between 35 and 40 students for each entering co-
1 50 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE hort. Prospective students are recruited through student-initiated inquiries to UA SLIS, through advertising by the College of Continuing Studies, by direct mail to potential students in the region, and by word-of-mouth as the program continues to mature. As part of establishing ongoing, cordial, and personal communications, prospective students are also contacted on an individual basis by administrative staff. Application and Admission Students are admitted only in the fall semester and must meet University re- quirements for regular graduate admis- sion. Students who reside within com- muting distance of campus must offer a compelling reason to enroll in the online option rather than enrolling in the face-to- face program on campus. Applications are batched and students selected to make up a diverse class based on academic history, age, gender, race/nationality, geographic location, work experience, and profes- sional goals. Administrative staff and fac- ulty communicate individually with each applicant as applications travel through the admissions process. Upon admission, students are contacted by the Distance Ed- ucation Coordinator with whom students participate in a "test drive" of the distance learning technology to be certain their computers, peripherals, software, and con- nections are suitable for full participation in courses. Students commit to completing 18 credit hours (the required core) with students entering at the same time (the "cohort"). Enrollment Students attend a one-credit-hour resi- dential (on-campus) orientation to the program, the college, and the university for three to four days prior to beginning classes. Students are introduced to one an- other, and to the faculty, as well as to the technology, curriculum, and traditions of UA SLIS. Students enroll in core courses based on an established rotation of two courses in fall, spring, and summer of year one. Students are permitted to deviate from the two-core-course norm but must take courses in sequence by making up courses not taken in year one during the same term in year two. Students who elect to reduce their course load to one course, or who choose to "sit out" for a term, will complete those core courses not taken in year one with members of subsequent co- horts. Instructional Delivery for Core Courses Core courses are scheduled during eve- ning hours. Each course meets one night per week for 2 hours and 45 minutes ex- cept in summer sessions when meetings are more frequent and presented in lon- ger workshop-like formats. Courses meet weekly via Wimba Live Classroom™, wherein students hear live lectures, par- ticipate in discussions, give presentations, hear guest lectures, and work individually and in groups. Presentation tools such as Power Point, streaming audio/video, and others are used at the instructor's discre- tion and as appropriate to the instructional units being delivered. Blackboard Vista™ is used to manage online courses and to provide materials as- sociated with courses such as links to read- ings, assignments, tests, and other required or optional documents. Course e-mail, discussion boards, and announcements enable students to communicate with one another and with faculty between formal class meetings. Facebook and other social media are also employed. Attendance is generally not an issue, since students se- lect this synchronous VoIP program with the anticipation of attending formal class sessions once a week. Students are encour- aged to interact with instructors and with one another during the delivery of course material. Individual class sessions are archived so that students can review content. Lec- tures, graphics, discussion, and chat are
Profiles in Retention Part 1 151 made available through the course archive, which is activated at the beginning of each class and terminated when the class ends. The technical support staff insure readiness for class sessions by conduct- ing microphone checks, troubleshooting, and directing student problems to rel- evant assistance when needed. Technical support is available during class sessions so that students who encounter technical problems can have their issues addressed outside the class session so that instruction is not interrupted. Private and public chat is used during classes to resolve technical problems, gain perspectives on content, and encourage the formation of a learning community. Instructional Delivery for Elective Courses Upon completion of the first year of core courses (or earlier if a student has successfully transferred a core course from another ALA-accredited program), the student enrolls in 18 hours of élec- tives. Electives were designed to be taken during year two of the student's program. Online electives are open to all UA SLIS students in addition to cohort members so that online students become acquainted with on-campus students, adding to their growing professional networks. Some stu- dents elect to take independent studies or internships in addition to elective courses. Socialization to VA SLIS A required one credit hour orientation includes academic and social activities designed to socialize students to SLIS and the University of Alabama. This orienta- tion includes introductions to university, college, and UA SLIS faculty, staff, alum- ni, and administrators. Members of previ- ous cohorts provide their perspectives as well. Structured introductions of students and faculty allow students to discover af- finities with other members of their cohort. Each entering cohort is encouraged to adopt a "name" to help build group identi- ties and a sense of camaraderie. Cohorts are encouraged to develop identities through activities such as devel- oping their group's preferred method of networking and engaging in activities that set them apart from other cohorts. Online town hall meetings are called at least once per term to provide online students the op- portunity to talk with the director and as- sistant to the director regarding courses, instructors, program concerns, and sched- uling. Socialization to LIS Orientation includes the introduction of online students to active members of the profession. Local and state library of- ficials welcome students to the profession. Orientation also includes an introduction to the curriculum with an emphasis on the required core courses. Discussion round tables on career options and functions are held during orientation in order to enable students to interact with like-minded co- hort members and to be advised as to ap- propriate course planning for specializa- tions. Responding to Barriers to Completion - Isolation Isolation is addressed through opportu- nities for group work, communication dur- ing and after class sessions, and social in- teraction. Cohort members hold dedicated leadership positions in UA SLIS student organizations to represent the interests of online students. Isolation is also addressed by making programs and other UA SLIS activities available to online students via technology. Guest speakers, faculty job candidate presentations, and workshops are regularly provided to off-site students live and via the archive. In addition, iso- lation is addressed by faculty and staff availability at formal and informal social events, at professional conferences, and at meetings throughout the country. Unoffi-
1 52 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE cial networks encourage online students to participate as frequently as, and to whatev- er degree, they feel comfortable doing so. Responding to Barriers to Completion - Financial Issues Financial concerns are addressed by scholarships awarded through the School's endowed scholarship program and by the University's College of Continuing Stud- ies. Students in the online program are also able to work as student assistants and occasional student workers when research funding permits assistance to be provided off campus. Responding to Barriers to Completion - Time Management Time constraints of working students arc addressed through the flexible enroll- ment that allows students to drop from two to one course per term, particularly during summer sessions when jobs and family obligations may need attention. Time con- straints arc also addressed by flexibility in the number of credit hours that may be earned through internships and directed readings or independent study. Students can enroll for one, two, or three hours within the UA MLIS nine-hour limita- tion for independent work and transferred courses. Program Administration A distance education coordinator, se- lected from the faculty, provides leader- ship for the admissions process, orienta- tion, and technical aspects of the program and represents faculty interests in deci- sion making about the program option. The director of UA SLIS provides leader- ship for the program option and assesses and reports to all constituents on matters such as recruitment, student performance, and retention. The assistant to the direc- tor, who has responsibility for student services within UA SLIS, manages com- munication with prospective, applicant, and admitted students. Teaching in this option is part of the normal teaching load. Thus, all UA SLIS faculty members are expected to teach in and participate in decision-making regarding the online program option. Retention and Time to Graduation Results Over the five-year period of this study, the U A MLIS program has documented rates of retention considerably higher than any identified in the research literature. Retention history for the first five years of the UA MLIS online program option is summarized in Table I. Retention is noted at the end of the first Table 1 . Retention of DE Cohorts That Entered between 2005 and 2009. N of Students % of Students N of Students % of Students Retained Retained Graduated or Graduated or Year N of through 1st through 1st Still Active Still Active Cohort No. Entered Students Year Year (2011) (2011) YTG* 1 2005 45 43 95.5 41 91.1 0 2 2006 43 40 93.0 34 79.1 1 3 2007 42 42 100.0 40 95.2 2 4 2008 43 40 93.0 40 93.0 3 5 2009 43 40 93.0 40 93.0 4 All All 216 205 95£ 196 907 - *Years-to-go = years of academic eligibility remaining as of 201 1.
Profiles in Retention Part 1 1 53 Table 2. Time to Degree for DE Cohorts That Entered between 2005 and 2009. Entrance N of Students Who are 1-2 Years to 3-4 Years to 5+ Years or Still Total Date Inactive or Withdrew Complete Complete Active 12/2011 Admitted 2005 4 29 1 1 1 45 2006 8 30 4 1 43 2007 2 27 11 2 42 2008 3 26 7 7 43 200 9 3 35 n/a 5* 43 *AII 5 are still enrolled; 3 are scheduled for 201 2 graduation. year of the two-year program and then graduation or continuing status as of De- cember 201 1 . It is expected that the over- all number and percentage of students graduating will increase as cohort mem- bers who entered in 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009, and who are still enrolled, complete degree requirements. Table 2 summarizes time to degree, to date, for the online stu- dents and notes the number of students still active after 4 or more years in the program. It also shows that the majority of students (68 percent) who began the online program option completed their studies by the end of the second calendar year. Another 15.3 percent of students have graduated within four years; thus the percentage of students graduating within four years is 83.4 percent. Sixteen active students from the 2005 through 2009 cohorts are highly likely to gradu- ate; they have completed significant por- tions of the degree program already and are the least likely to quit now. The still- active students could add 7.4 percent to the completion rate, enabling this online program option to see a graduate rate of 90.4 percent over five cohorts. Discussion We turn to the education literature on retention in order to better understand the success of the U A MLI S graduate synchro- nous online ML1S program option in re- taining students at an unusually high rate. To accomplish this, the design character- istics of the UA SLIS program have been mapped to factors associated with reten- tion as reported by others. Shanley (2009) provides a literature-based framework for such a mapping. While Shanley's lit- erature review focuses on specific factors related to asynchronous classes, his list nonetheless provides a good starting point for categorizing activities and attributes of programs identified by other research- ers. Table 3 identifies factors that have been associated with retention in online courses, including support services, clear student expectations, orientation to the on- line course, technology readiness, faculty preparedness, student control, age factors, participation, and social integration. Table 3 then presents a brief statement on each of the designed activities and attributes of the UA MLIS online option implementa- tion as mapped to the factors identified by Shanley and others. As the online MLIS program option at the University of Alabama School of Li- brary and Information Studies was imple- mented in 2005, it was designed without benefit of most of the literature reported here. However, the online program option was deliberately designed to maintain the same academic rigor as the face-to-face program and to replicate those characteris- tics of the SLIS experience most valued by alumni and students. These included "be- ing a program where faculty and students interacted regularly," "being a program where students could receive individual attention if needed," "being a program where the faculty understood the issues confronting employed, part-time students
1 54 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE with adult responsibilities," and "being a close-knit community." These aspects and how they were incorporated have been de- scribed in part by Aversa, Bajjaly, Barlow, Hahn, Lester, and Riggs (2009), and Mac- Call, Aversa, and Guenther (2006). Conclusions and Recommenda- tions for Further Study It is evident now that many of the factors associated with retention of on- line students have been implemented by the UA SLIS program option. It is also clear, from comparison with other retention data reported in the literature, that the U A SLIS program option has retained a greater-than-expected propor- tion of entering students. The role of the individual student, or learner, and his or her academic background, learning style, personal responsibilities, profes- sional obligations and aspirations have not been addressed here, but are includ- ed in Part 2. Evidence from the two stud- ies should allow for discovery of which attributes of a program and its students are most highly related to both retention and program outcomes. There are still areas that call for addi- tional work. First, there has been very little written about differences in retention rates and factors with synchronous versus asyn- chronous instructional delivery. Second, we are just beginning to parse the differ- ences between online undergraduate and graduate students and how they respond to online learning. This work should con- tinue. Third, as we gather more data on program retention, we should now begin to look at whether whole programs of study or individual online classes result in similar retention/attrition. And we also need to ask, are retention rates and factors different or the same for programs in di- verse disciplines? In professional or cog- nate programs? Pursuit of these topics is needed if we are to successfully educate 2 1 st century students and move the reten- tion rate higher in online programs. Table 3. SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Source & Context Attribute/ Attribute/Activity for of Study in the SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Retention of Students Literature Implemented Administrative support Initiate early contact Angelo 2007 - Prospective students are contacted with students & appli- Misc. courses; by faculty & staff; ongoing, cor- cants by telephone Bart 201 1 - MSHE dial, & personal communications program are established at the recruitment stage. In lieu of e-mail, telephone contact is provided by the assistant to the director who shepherds applicants from first inquiry to enrollment. Administrative support Initiate early contact Nistor 2010 - Initial & ongoing contact is pro- with students & ap- Misc. courses vided by e-mail communications plicants by e-mail from the assistant to the director who shepherds applicants from first inquiry to enrollment. (continued)
Profiles in Retention Part 1 1 55 Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Source & Context Attribute/ Attribute/Activity for of Study in the SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Retention of Students Literature Implemented Administrative support Keep students Bunn 2004 - MLIS During the application phase the informed about program staff informs students of changes changes in program via e-mail & posts significant changes on the website. Administrative support Make efforts for Boston 201 0 - Students at orientation are made retention early in Undergrad. aware of potential difficulties & program when leav- program are given instructions as to how ing is most likely to get assistance from faculty, academic advisors, & staff. Administrative support Develop attrition Nitsch 2003 - Grad. The director & assistant to the management plans program director, along with the DE coor- dinator, track student enrollment. Regular planning & follow-up session are held each term with the director, assistant, & coordina- tor. Admission & retention are also discussed with partnering College of Continuing Studies. Administrative support Plan & organize for Siegel 201 1 - Orientation, town hall meetings, retention Undergraduate advising, & social events at profes- courses sional conferences keep students in touch with the program. Administrative support Monitor registration Shahdad 201 1 - If a member of a cohort fails to & focus on those Misc. programs register, a message or call goes out who do not register to determine why, usually the first for 2-3 terms missed registration. Student support Conduct pre-course Angelino 2007 - An extensive on-campus orienta- orientation or boot Misc. courses; tion consisting of three or four camp Gleason 2004 - days of academic & social interac- Misc. programs; tion is held with each entering Tyler-Smith 2005 - cohort. Adult ed. program Students are oriented to the uni- versity, the school, the program, technology systems, & their cohort during the orientation. Student support Make financial as- Breier 201 0 - Earmarked endowed scholar- sistance available Campus programs; ships are offered by U A SLIS & Siegel 201 1 - the College of Continuing Studies Under-graduate f°r part-time & online learners, courses UA SLIS encourages applications. Online students are also eligible & win academic awards & honor society tapping. (continued)
1 56 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Attribute/ Attribute/Activity for Source & Context of SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Retention of Students Study in the Literature Implemented Student support Provide early online Angelino 2007 - At orientation students are i ntro- access to library Misc. courses duced to a wide array of services, services, registration, & the individuals responsible for counseling, etc. them (librarians, students with disabilities coordinators, etc.) As- sistance is available by telephone or e-mail regarding registration, financial assistance & other ser- vices. Student support Provide information Tyler-Smith 2005 - Students receive instruction on on technology, course Adult ed. program the use of university systems, the management, content, course management system & the & communications at Wimba system during the orien- boot camp tation. A session about the first courses & the program curriculum is also held at orientation. Student academic Provide prompt Bunn 2004 - UA SLIS maintains the same aca- experience feedback MLIS program demie requirements of both faculty & students in online & face to face classes. Students have the same opportunities to assess classes, to provide faculty feedback, & to communicate with the administra- tion. SLIS does not have a specific requirement for turn-around time on e-mail or assignments but stu- dents expect reasonable response times. Student academic Focus on academic Willcoxson 201 0 - Faculty advisers assist students experience integration after initial Business courses in planning both course selec- term tion & their careers post-MLIS. Advisers help development the students' individual plans to meet their professional, educational, & personal goals. Most faculty hold online office hours & students may provide feedback to the admin- istration through "virtual town hall meetings/' Online classes are taught by the same faculty who teach on-campus classes so course integrity is maintained. (continued)
Profiles in Retention Part 1 1 57 Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Attribute/Activity Source & Context Attribute/ for Retention of of Study in the SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Students Literature Implemented Faculty preparedness Prepare faculty Angelo 2007 - The University & its Faculty with course design Misc. courses Resource Center (FRC) along with workshops & other the College of Continuing Studies assistance with supported course migration to syn- pedagogy chronous online delivery mode. Workshops & individual instruc- tion were available to faculty. Faculty preparedness Provide faculty Serwayka 2005 - Within the program faculty, opportunities to Misc. courses an each-one teach-one culture develop classes & developed & colleagues helped design their own one another develop classes. The instruction coordinator of the program option also spent time assisting as faculty members moved to online teach- ing; Instructional delivery Use synchronous Reigle 201 0 - The selection of a synchronous, learning tools Misc. courses real-time technology to deliver instruction was deliberate. It al- lowed for the "personal contact" that graduates valued, & it allowed adult learners to communicate di- rectly with faculty & other students in classes. Instructional delivery Provide faculty Roughton 201 1 - The College of Continuing Studies training in the use Misc. courses provided travel & faculty devel- of synchronous opment funds for attendance at presentation tools Wimba conferences & workshops. Instructional delivery Vary methods of Serwayka 2005 - Faculty are encouraged to exercise presentation in Misc. courses academic freedom in how they classes present material & which tools they use in the online venue. Technology preparedness Provide opportuni- Nitsch 2003 - Students are introduced to the ties for students to Graduate program technology used to deliver instruc- gain technological tion prior to attending orientation, knowledge & skills Individual "test drives" of the sys- tem eliminate anxiety in this area. Technology preparedness Provide good Bunn 2004 - Students have a chance to practice technical training & MLIS program; using the technology during orien- support for students Gleason 2004 - tation. & faculty Misc. programs (continued)
1 58 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Attribute/ Activity Source & Context Attribute/ for Retention of of Study in the SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Students Literature Implemented Technology preparedness Provide technical Bunn 2004 - Technical support is provided to support at single MLIS program students through graduate teach- point of contact ing assistants who monitor the classes for technical problems. If support beyond this is required, the technical support monitors can make contact or direct the student to other resources. Some faculty members provide their own technical support & students are encouraged to help one another when rare problems arise. Social integration Make group Bunn 2004 - Group work is used in many (team) assign- MLIS program; classes. The concept of working ments & encour- gart 201 1 - W|th colleagues at a distance is age student MSHE program introduced in the first course, & interaction students develop skills at online communication & teamwork throughout the first terms. Social integration Provide virtual & Angelo 2007 - On-line students are encouraged alternative activi- Misc. courses; to participate in all the activi- ties for students Humphreys 201 0 - ties of UA SLIS & faculty & staff MLIS program ensure that these opportunities are there. Student meetings, presenta- tions by visiting scholars, & job search workshops & other similar activities are provided via the syn- chronous live classroom & these activities are also archived. Social integration Focus on social Gleason 2004 - Students are encouraged in this integration early Misc. programs regard from pre-orientation corn- in program munication, through orientation, & into the classroom. Social integration Facilitate students Willcoxson 201 0 - to integrate & Business program maintain a pres- ence in class Social integration Use diverse Serwatka 2005 - approaches to Misc. programs; enhance student Schaeffer 201 0 - engagement Misc. courses Communications Require student Nitsch 2003 - writing skills Graduate program (continued)
Profiles in Retention Part 1 1 59 Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Attribute/ Attribute/Activity for Source & Context of SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Activity Category Retention of Students Study in the Literature Implemented Communications Encourage faculty-stu- Bunn 2004 - Communication between the dent communications MLIS program coordinator, assistant, & direc- tor are encouraged. Students are also encouraged to communicate directly with their academic advi- sors & their teaching professors. This emphasis on communication, getting assistance when needed, & keeping in touch with peers is emphasized from the application process & throughout the student's program at UA SLIS. Communications Facilitate communica- Angelo 2007 - Most faculty allow, and some en- tion via chat Misc. courses courage, the use of monitored chat during class. Communications Encourage class par- Nistor 201 0 - A list of students who are "in the ticipation Misc. courses room" is displayed during online classes; some faculty take roll while others encourage regular attendance. Communication Provide means for Humphreys 201 0 - Students are encouraged to use adequate & responsive MLIS program a range of technologies, includ- communications ing social networking, in the first semester & to build technical skill on that foundation. Expectations Ensure reasonable Bunn 2004 - Expectations, both of faculty & stu- student expectations of MLIS program; dents, are discussed at orientation program Herbert 2006 - as well as during later advising Misc. courses sessions. The assistant to the director and others maintain templates for e- mail correspondence to assure that questions are answered consis- tently, but every effort is made to build a personal communication with each student as well. Student factors Ensure student under- Long 2009 - Student factors are addressed in standing of time re- Continuing profes- Part 2 of this study, quirements for learning sional training; Nitsch 2003 - Graduate program Student factors Ensure that students Nitsch 2003 - Student factors are addressed in know how to work in Graduate program Part 2 of this study. teams (continued)
1 60 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 3 (continued). SLIS Program Design Attributes Mapped to Program Activities Associated with Retention Recommended Source & Context Attribute/Activity Attribute/Activity for Re- of Study in the SLIS Program Attribute/Activity as Category tention of Students Literature Implemented Student factors Develop student ability to Nitsch 2003 - Student factors are addressed in complete work on time Graduate program Part 2 of this study. Student factors Be sure students can deal Perry 2008 - Student factors are addressed in with jobs, families, finances Graduate nursing Part 2 of this study. program Student factors Maturity, fitness with online Shanley, 2009 - Student factors are addressed in learning and motivation Misc. courses Part 2 of this study, factors Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the editorial assistance provided by Anthony Cox, a doctoral student in the College of Com- munication and Information Science, The University of Alabama. References Angelo, L.M., Williams, F.K., & Natvig, D. (2007). Strategies to engage online students and reduce attrition rates. The Journal of Education Online, 4(2), 1-13. Aversa, E., Bajjaly, S., Barlow, D., Hahn, T., Les- ter, J., & Riggs, B. (2009, November). Web- based teaching: Surviving and thriving in a plu- ralistic online world. Panel presentation given at the 72nd Annual Meeting of the American So- ciety for Information Science and Technology, Vancouver, BC. Aversa, E., & MacCall, S. (2008, March). Innovat- ing, differentiating and assuring cultural com- patibility. Presentation given at Wimba Connect 2008 Conference, Orlando, FL. Bart, M. (201 1, June 8) How to make your online students feel connected. Faculty Focus. Boston, W. E., Jr. (2010). Measuring student re- tention at an online institution of higher edu- cation. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved from http://repository.upenn.edu/dissertations/ AAI34 10483 Brier, M. (2010). From "financial considerations" to "poverty": Towards a reconceptualisation of the role of finances in higher education student drop out. Higher Education, 60 , 657-670. Bunn, J. (2004). Student persistence in a LIS dis- tance education program. Australian Academic & Research Libraries, 35(3), 253-269. Re- trieved from http://alianet.alia.org.au/publishing/ aarl/35.3/bunn.pdf Canadian Association of Graduate Schools. (2004) The completion of graduate studies in Canadian universities. Ottawa, ON: CAGS. Carr, S. (2000) As distance education comes of age, the challenge is keeping the students. Chronicle of Higher Education, 46(23), A39-41 . Gleason, B. J. (2004) Retention issues in online pro- grams: A review of the literature. Second AIMS International Conference on Management. Cal- cutta, India, December 28-31. Retrieved from http://www.thinairlabs.eom/papers/2 1 6.pdf Herbert, M. (2006). Staying the course: A study in online student satisfaction and retention. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, IX( iv), 1-12. Humphreys, A.H., & Konomos, P. (2010) Student perspectives on campus-based versus online courses. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 7(8), paper 3, 1-9. Lawson, V. (1969). Reference service in univer- sity libraries: Two case studies. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Columbia University, New York, NY. Long, L., Dubois, C., & Faley, R. (2009). A case study analysis of factors that influ- ence attrition rates in voluntary online training programs. International Journal on E-Learning, 8(3' 347-359. MacCall, S., Aversa, E., & Guenther, A. (2006, January). Talking online education: Delivering a synchronous UA SLIS program in a two-way VoIP context. Panel presentation given at the An- nual Conference of the Association for Library & Information Science Education, Seattle, WA. Nistor, N., & Neubauer, K. (2010) From participa-
Profiles in Retention Part 1 161 tion to dropout: Quantitative participation pat- terns in online university courses. Computers and Education, 55, 663-672. Nitsch, W. B. (2003). Examination of factors leading to student retention in online graduate education. Project Paper for Administration and Leadership of Distance Education Programs. Re- trieved from http://www.decadeconsulting.com/ decade/papers/StudentRetention.pdf Paris, M. (1988) Library school closings: Four case studies. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. Peny, B., Boman, J., Care, W.D., Edwards, M., & Park C. (2008). Why do students withdraw from online graduate nursing and health studies edu- cation? The Journal of Educators Online, 5( I ), 1-17. Reigle, R. R. (2010). Student attrition : An argument for synchronous learning online. Non-journal re- search report. ERIC Document ED5 13689. n.p. Roughton, C., Martin, F., Warren, J., & Gritmon, C. (2011). Challenges in synchronous virtual classrooms adoption by faculty. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Dis- tance Learning, 8(2), 1-9. Schaeffer, C.E., & Konetes, G.D. (2010). Impact of learner engagement on attrition rates and student success in online learning. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learn- ing, 7(5), 1-7. Serwatka, J. A. (2005). Improving retention in dis- tance learning classes. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(1), 1-7. Shahdad, M., & Khan, R. (201 1, November). Fac- tors impacting student retention in online pro- grams: A research study. Presentation at the 1 7th Sloan Consortium Conference, Orlando, FL. Shanley, K. J. (2009). Ten factors of student reten- tion in online courses (Master of Science Paper in Instructional Technology). Utah State Univer- sity, Logan, UT. Siegel, M. J. (2011). Reimagining the retention problem: Moving our thinking from end-product to by-product. About Campus, I5( 1 ), 8-18. Tyler-Smith, K. (2006). Early attrition among first time eLearners: A review of factors that contrib- ute. Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 2(2), 1-11. Willcoxson, L. (2010). Factors affecting intention to leave in the first, second, and third year of uni- versity studies: A semester by semester investi- gation. Higher Education Research and Develop- ment, 29, 623. Yin, R. K. ( 1 989). Case study research: Design and methods. London, UK: Sage. Yin, R. K. ( 1 98 1 ). The case study as a serious re- search strategy. Knowledge : Creation, Diffusion, Utilization, 5(1), 97-114.