THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 50 APRIL 1980 Number 2 AFTERMATH OF A CRUSADE: WORLD WAR I AND THE ENLARGED PROGRAM OF THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION Arthur P. Young Shortly after the United States entered World War 1, the American Library Association (ALA) embarked on an ambitious program, the Library War Service, to furnish library materials and services to an American army of several million men. The considerable success of this wartime venture, coupled with the nation's postwar euphoria, prompted the ALA leadership to sponsor, in the early months of 1919, a project known as the Enlarged Program. The Enlarged Program was a major initiative to revitalize library services and to establish ALA as the dominant force in library affairs. Among the proposals were continuation of selected war-related services, closer liaison with other professional groups, new programs of service for adults and immigrants, promotion of library extension, certifica- tion of professional education, and constitutional revision. To achieve these objectives, a $2 million fund drive was authorized. Despite the best of intentions, the Enlarged Program turned into ALA's most humiliating defeat until that time. The objectives, campaign strategy, ideology, and reception of the Enlarged Program are considered and assessed. Prelude When, in the summer of 1914, an assassin's bullet ended the life of Archduke Francis Ferdinand in Sarajevo, Bosnia, few Americans be- lieved that the incident would trigger the catastrophic conflict familiarly [Library Quarterly, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 191-207] ? 1980 by The University of Chicago. 0024-2519/80/5002-0001$01.44 191
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY known as World War I or, simply, the Great War. For almost three years, President Wilson pursued a progressively difficult policy of neutrality toward the warring parties, but the continuing threat of Germany's submarine warfare and the very real possibility that western Europe might fall persuaded Wilson and his advisers in April 1917 that America must declare war and join the Allies. That decision had momentous implications for the nation, including the American Library Association (ALA). For most Americans, the war became a morally charged, even spiritualized, struggle against the tyranny of German autocracy. Libra- rians, too, readily embraced the patriotic emotionalism and were eager to contribute their services to the war effort. A significant contribution by ALA was not foreordained by its history. Between 1876 and 1917, the association had made modest gains in defining the field of librarianship and convincing the public of the library's educational value. To accept responsibility for a program of library service to an American army of several million men did not seem probable for an organization of 3,300 members which operated on an annual budget of $24,000. But when the opportunity arose, the association boldly accepted the challenge-and succeeded beyond expectation. Shortly after the American declaration of war, ALA established a War Service Committee to explore the type and extent of assistance which it might be able to provide. This committee, in June 1917, accepted an invitation from the War Department's Commission on Training Camp Activities to furnish library materials and services to U.S. soldiers throughout the world. The association was one of the seven welfare groups affiliated with the commission. ALA's wartime program, designated the Library War Service, was directed by Herbert Putnam, Librarian of Congress, and later by Carl H. Milam, the future secretary of the associ- ation. Between 1917 and 1920, ALA mounted two financial campaigns and raised $5 million from public donations, erected thirty-six camp library buildings from Carnegie Corporation funds, and distributed 10 million books and magazines to over 5,000 locations. Nearly 1,200 per- sons worked in military libraries administered by ALA. Librarians, by their zealous promotion of libraries as educational cen- ters and agencies of social reformation, were engaged in what may be considered a global book crusade. For a brief time the crusade trans- formed ALA from a relatively unknown professional society into a public service organization with national aspirations for leadership and service. The episode of the Library War Service proved to many libra- rians and civilian leaders that the association could mobilize the re- sources of the nation's libraries and perform a difficult task with distinc- tion. The results were gratifying. The military departments assimilated
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 193 the library programs and continued them after the war, the association's headquarters library in France continued as the American Library in Paris, and the war influenced subsequent directions of ALA in the areas of adult education and international cooperation. Above all, the associa- tion savored the public recognition that it had sought for so long. That exhilarating experience, in turn, led prominent leaders of the associa- tion to sponsor a project known as the Enlarged Program. The story begins several months after the Armistice [1, passiml.' Postwar Aspirations Apathy, despair, and a "return to normalcy" would follow soon enough after the Armistice; but the mood did not change precipitously. During the immediate postwar months, the nation experienced a period of buoyant expectation. America's future seemed to be on everyone's agenda. Optimism abounded, especially among religious, social, and professional organizations. Now was the propitious moment, many re- formers believed, to capitalize on the moral enthusiasm and cooperative spirit unleashed by the war. Under the rubric of reconstruction, many ideas and proposals were advanced relating to social justice, economic security, and political reformation [2, pp. 31-45]. Talk was plentiful, but it was not easy to discern a coherent direction. Some viewed reconstruction as a vehicle for spiritual regeneration, others saw it as an opportunity to revamp the economic system, and still others interpreted it to mean the redistribution of political power. Be- neath the cascade of activist rhetoric, however, was a common set of postulates. History was an exploitive process, a continuing tyranny of the few over the many. America was at the threshold of an egalitarian age, and all citizens should enjoy the benefits of modern technology. Certain political, social, and economic imbalances needed correction, and there was a consensus that the transition could be accomplished peaceably. The unfinished agenda would be realized through increased voluntary cooperation and, preferably, through expanded regulatory actions of the government [3, pp. 352-53]. Birth of the Enlarged Program The reconstruction program of the American Library Association, des- ignated the Enlarged Program, began as a modest proposal for a library 1. For an extended treatment of ALA during World War I, consult Young [1].
194 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY survey. In a few months, this project was transformed into a major commitment to organizational change and expanded library services. In many respects, the Enlarged Program was a microcosm of postwar recon- structionism. Leaders of the Enlarged Program emphasized the role of books and libraries as instrumentalities for social betterment. Enhanced organizational prestige and greater regulatory authority within the pro- fession were implicit, if not explicit, goals. And the best way to achieve these ends was to harness the collective strength of the nation's libraries and library supporters. On January 11, 1919, the executive board authorized William Warner Bishop, president of ALA, to appoint a Committee of Five to survey the entire field of American library services. The survey, Bishop said, would be analogous to the celebrated Committee of Ten report on secondary education in 1893, and Abraham Flexner's influential report on medical education in 1910. A library survey would enable librarians to evaluate the success or failure of their services and internal operations. Bishop wanted specific facts, not "hortatory or theoretical" information. The resultant data would provide the library profession, for the first time, with the information needed to establish standards for buildings, equipment, services, and salaries. Appointed to serve on the Committee of Five were Arthur E. Bostwick, St. Louis Public Library, chairman; Linda A. Eastman, Cleveland Public Library; Azariah S. Root, Oberlin College Library; Charles C. Williamson, New York Public Library; and Carl H. Milam, acting director of the Library War Service. The commit- tee was requested to prepare a report for the Asbury Park (New Jersey) conference in June [4]. Milam was among those who envisioned a much broader program than a general survey of library conditions. Three weeks before the annual conference, he wrote to Walter L. Brown, former ALA presi- dent, that the association should continue to support war-related pro- grams, principally the services to the merchant marine, hospitals, and the blind. As for the American Library Association, Milam favored a vigorous new role: "The A.L.A. should undertake the responsibility of making itself the big force behind all library development, issuing prop- aganda, arousing interest, conducting campaigns in the field for estab- lishment of library commissions, public libraries, libraries in industrial concerns, libraries in state penal, correctional and charitable institutions, etc. No matter what results may come from the discussion of these subjects at Asbury Park, I feel that we have already accomplished some- things [sic] and assume as a matter of course that we can get the money somewhere if we decided that we really ought to do the work" [5]. As instructed by President Bishop, the committee presented its report to the members at Asbury Park. In presenting the report, the committee
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 195 indicated that the survey was justified on the grounds that present library work was carried on without accurate comparative data. The task of gathering and sifting the data would be largely accomplished by a vol- unteer staff. Expenses for travel, clerical assistance, and publication of the final report were estimated at $88,000. Four survey areas were defined and assigned to committee members. Root was given responsi- bility for the acquisition, technical processing, and storage of books. Circulation, reference, and library extension were the topics assigned to Eastman. Library education, staff training, and salaries would be analyzed by Williamson. Milam would investigate library-government relations, finances, and publicity [6, pp. 326-28]. Meanwhile, the council was considering whether the association should raise a $1 million dollar endowment for peace work. Pride in the wartime library service and the reconstructionist mood in the country were conducive to favorable consideration. James Wyer, chairman of the War Service Committee, endorsed the idea, noting that the patriotic motivation behind the Library War Service would sustain a postwar program and fund-raising campaign. Theresa Hitchler of the Brooklyn Public Library worried about the consequences of not supporting an endowment: "If the A.L.A. is not going to sink back and become a reactionary institution it ought to go right on and continue where it left off with the library war service" [6, p. 362]. Charles E. Rush, chairman of the Publicity Committee, delivered a stirring speech on behalf of an expanded program: "We must create prestige and build good will for the entire organization, arouse public confidence in the library as an educational enterprise, interpret the service of libraries to the public and furnish humanized, dramatized reviews of library activities. A publicity service bureau designed to inaugurate a nationwide educational pro- gram is the . . . most advantageous method to accomplish such results" [6, pp. 364-65]. Not all of the comments on the proposed endowment were favorable. Frank P. Hill, chairman of the Library War Finance Committee and director of the Brooklyn Public Library, cautioned the members that a large sum of money, at least $50,000, would be required to underwrite a drive for an endowment fund. He also feared that the public was tired of money campaigns and that library trustees would not release their staffs to work on another campaign. Further study of an endowment was desirable, Hill conceded, but a good plan would take at least one year [6, p. 368]. Most trenchant of the critics, predictably, was John Cotton Dana of the Newark Public Library. The association, asserted Dana, should consider not what libraries were but what they ought to be; what needed to be studied then was not library activities but rather "the place of the library phenomenon in a print-using society" [6, p. 369]. Any
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY survey should also examine the association's staff and mission. Dana singled out ALA's seventeen-year-old constitution as a major deterrent to progress. He proposed instead a single-page document which would entrust leadership of the association to no more than five persons [6, p. 370). Deferring to the council's sentiment for expanded postwar services, the executive board, on June 27, 1919, at the Asbury Park conference, appointed a Committee on Enlarged Program. Accompanying the ap- pointment was a declaration by the executive board that it was "the responsibility of the American Library Association to encourage and promote the development of library service for every man, woman and child in America" [6, p. 3591. Members of the Enlarged Program Com- mittee were Frank P. Hill, chairman; Caroline F. Webster, New York State Library; Carl H. Milam; John Cotton Dana; and Walter L. Brown. On September 9, 1919, Milam was appointed director of the Enlarged Program. Milam's new position consolidated his administrative control over virtually all ALA activities. He was now acting general director of the Library War Service, director of the Enlarged Program, and a member of the executive board. Six months later he was to become executive secretary of ALA upon George Utley's resignation. The Agenda Taking the executive board's charge seriously, the Committee on En- larged Program met twelve times during the summer of 1919. A tenta- tive document was approved by the executive board at Richfield Springs, New York, in early September and was published in Library Journal the following month. Recommendations were divided into three categories: continuation of war-related activities, new programs, and constitutional revision. A one-year budget of $1.2 million was proposed. Of this figure, $700,000 was needed to support programs growing out of the war. Library service would be continued for hospitals, lighthouses, the mer- chant marine, industrial plants, and blind soldiers. It was anticipated that this portion of the program would not extend much beyond one year [7, pp. 645-501. Another substantial allocation, nearly $600,000, was set aside for new programs. In order to promote library extension in the states, it was recommended that ALA function as a national library commission. States would be helped by the association to secure favorable library legislation and to initiate library service in unserved areas. A national examining board, empowered to grant certificates and to set standards for library schools, was to be established. The library survey was also to
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 197 be a part of the Enlarged Program. Heeding Dana's earlier admonition, the survey would evaluate the role of libraries in the social and educa- tional life of the nation [7, pp. 651-521. A national program of education and information was highlighted. The association would be responsible for a "nationwide promulgation of the library idea, designed to stimulate the extension and development of libraries and to increase the use of print" [7, p. 6521. These goals would be accomplished through exhibits, publicity, and the promotion of higher librarians' salaries. Provision was made for a study of ALA's publishing activities. Another objective, unfunded, was to establish closer relations with the National Education Association. If teachers more fully appreciated the value of libraries, perhaps they might lend their prestigious support to the Enlarged Program. Other features of the plan encompassed service to institutional libraries and immigrants. Fi- nally, a financial campaign to raise $2 million was recommended [7, pp. 652-59]. Constitutional revision was considered to be within the mandate of the Committee on Enlarged Program. Actually, two committees were writ- ing a new constitution. Frank Hill's group, apparently unaware of the special committee on constitutional reform appointed at Asbury Park, issued its version in October 1919. The special committee, consisting of William W. Bishop, George B. Utley, and Chalmers Hadley, ALA presi- dent, released its version the following month. Differences between the two documents were relatively minor. New powers were conferred on the executive board at the expense of the council. The executive board was vested with the authority to appoint all committees. Questions of policy must be submitted to the executive board before any action by the membership. Divested of its former powers, the council was reduced to discussing professional issues and adopting resolutions. Entanglement of constitutional reform with the Enlarged Program was unfortunate. Those members opposed to organizational change tended to transfer their distrust to the Enlarged Program itself [8]. Deliberation and Doubt Almost as soon as details concerning the proposed Enlarged Program were disclosed, rumors began to circulate about the removal of the ALA headquarters from Chicago to New York. Resentment was particularly strong in the Midwest. In November 1919, the LibraryJournal attempted to defuse the issue, saying that "there is no foundation for this impres- sion" [9]. There had been several informal exchanges among members, but no formal discussion or proposals had been introduced at the
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Richfield Springs meeting. However, a month later President Hadley admitted that a proposal to transfer the headquarters to New York had been introduced at Richfield Springs. At his insistence, Hadley said, the recommendation was deleted from the committee's report. Any suspi- cion that such action would be taken without the members' consent, Hadley declared, was entirely unwarranted [10]. Announcement that a 4"temporary financial headquarters" would be set up in New York City, however, only seemed to confirm apprehensions [11]. No concerted attempt to move the headquarters was ever uncovered, but the rumors served to heighten suspicions. The first special session to discuss the Enlarged Program was held in Chicago, January 1-3, 1920. Three hundred and twenty-eight delegates braved Chicago's bone-numbing weather to attend [12, p. 251]. Con- stitutional revision dominated the first day's debate. President Hadley presided, while Bishop explained the new constitution and solicited questions. Constituting themselves as a committee of the whole, the members challenged Bishop on every point down to the punctuation. Disapproval was pervasive concerning the procedures for electing hon- orary members, the new policy prerogatives of the executive board, the role of affiliated organizations, and the divestiture of the council's traditional powers [13, 14]. With such a reception, there was no choice but to recommit the constitution for further revision. Bishop had with- stood the assault with commendable forbearance; nonetheless, he left Chicago disconsolate over the rejection of his work [12, pp. 251-52]. Criticism of the Enlarged Program was more restrained, yet there was disaffection over some actions of the program's leaders and plans for the financial campaign. Phineas L. Windsor, University of Illinois Library, was irritated by the hiring of a publicity consultant, J. Ray Johnson, before the Chicago meeting, and by Milam's forwarding of a letter to journalism schools asking for their assistance. Milam "manfully took the responsibility," making his apologies for any premature commitment [13, p. 56]. Hill and Richard R. Bowker, the library publisher, deflected the charge of a premature use of funds by informing members that a $52,000 loan to the Enlarged Program, from the 1917 Library War Service account, had been approved by the executive board. Later, the Enlarged Program received another loan of $150,000 from Library War Service funds [15, pp. 6-71. There were differing viewpoints over how funds for the Enlarged Program should be raised. Realizing that some members were against a fund drive of the type conducted during the war, Hill cautiously re- ferred to "raising money" instead of an "intensive drive" [15, p. 5]. The $2 million, to be used over a three-year period, would be obtained from foundations and general subscriptions. To many members, Hill's state-
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 199 ment that no intensive campaign would be conducted was unsatisfactory. Finally, a resolution was passed which gave approval for an "appeal for funds," but it specifically prohibited any quota system [ 15, pp. 7-8]. The committee's inability to fend off this restriction and the members' lukewarm commitment to the financial campaign were harbingers of difficulties ahead. Charles H. Compton, Seattle Public Library, correctly perceived the limiting effect of these strictures: they were "like giving a general orders to win a battle but instructing him that his army should go slow" [16, p. 80]. Until the Chicago meeting, there was no way of measuring the degree of concern over the alleged proposals to move the ALA headquarters to New York. To air the subject, Arthur E. Bostwick moved that the Enlarged Program be operated from the Chicago offices. President Hadley, who had earlier denied that a New York move was con- templated, ruled that the resolution was a matter of policy and must come before the council. Bostwick appealed the chair's ruling and was sustained by the members. Although he was not opposed to a complete move, Bostwick explained, the idea of two headquarters was a needless duplication. The motion carried. This motion had no practical effect; the Enlarged Program conducted its ill-fated campaign from the New York office which it shared with the Library War Service [ 15, pp. 8-9]. Unlike the proposed constitutional revision, the Enlarged Program survived the scrutiny at Chicago. During the next few months, the campaign organization was assembled, regional directors were ap- pointed, and numerous publicity items were released. Just as the finan- cial campaign was gaining some momentum, opponents of the Enlarged Program publicly called for substantial modifications. Perhaps aware that even more criticism was imminent, the Committee on Enlarged Program issued "An Explanation" on March 16, 1920. In a 3-page pamphlet, the Enlarged Program was defended as a project authorized by the association and essentially quite modest in conception. Not more than a dozen letters of protest had been received by the executive board or the committee. Other organizations, such as the Salvation Army and the National Tuberculosis Association, had already run successful ap- peals. It was time, declared the committee, to close ranks and stand by the "Committee and the Association itself and its good repute" [17]. Two weeks later, a circular letter signed by thirteen prominent libra- rians was sent to every member of the association. A considerable pro- portion of the membership, it was asserted, opposed the Enlarged Pro- gram as currently defined, while a still greater percentage of members favored the imposition of "more definite limits." Signers of this letter, representing every section of the country, included Mary F. Isom, Port- land (Oregon) Public Library; John H. Leete, Carnegie Library of
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Pittsburgh; Henry N. Sanborn, Bridgeport (Connecticut) Public Library; and Thomas L. Montgomery, former ALA president, Pennsylvania State Library. Three conspicuous members of the War Service Committee also signed the letter: Edwin H. Anderson, New York Public Library; Arthur E. Bostwick; and Gratia Countryman, Minneapolis Public Library [18]. The dissenters enumerated four resolutions which they hoped the association would adopt: (1) to keep the Enlarged Program within limits of accomplishment, (2) to discontinue free service by ALA to govern- ment departments as soon as the present funds were exhausted, (3) to limit the campaign to securing funds for professional objects which are assured of permanent maintenance, and (4) to require officials of the association to provide adequate information about the Enlarged Pro- gram. A postcard was enclosed with the letter, enabling recipients to register their views. Differing somewhat from the resolution, the post- card asked for a decision on whether the funds collected should be used for a permanent endowment [18]. Slightly more than 1,000 postcards in support of the resolutions were turned over to the executive board. With approximately 25 percent of the 4,400 members critical of certain as- pects of the Enlarged Program, it would be very difficult to conduct a successful financial campaign [19]. Even if the association could have closed ranks behind the Enlarged Program, public support was not assured. Many citizens, saturated by the wartime fund drives, would turn a deaf ear to appeals after the war. A satiric leaflet, captioned "Some Reasons Why the People Are Opposed to the Financial Campaign of the A.L.A.," conveyed one citizen's frus- tration over governmental intrusions and the endless charitable appeals. The story related the response of a wealthy San Antonio man to his bank's letter calling in his collateral loan: For the following reasons I am unable to send you the check asked for: I have been held up, held down, and sandbagged, walked on, sat on, flattened out and squeezed. First by the United States Government, for federal war tax, the excess profit tax, and the liberty loan bonds, thrift, capital stock tax, mer- chants license and auto tax, and by every society and organization that the inventive mind can invent to extract what I may or may not possess. The government has so governed my business that I don't know who owns it. I am inspected, suspected, examined, re-examined, informed, required and commanded, so I don't know who I am, where I am, or why I am here. All I know is I am supposed to be an inexhaustible supply of money for every known need, desire or hope of the human race; and because I will not sell all I have and go out and beg, borrow or steal money to give away, I have been cussed, dis- cussed, boycotted, talked to, talked about, lied to, lied about, held up, hung up, robbed and nearly ruined; and the only reason I am clinging to life is to see what in the Hell is coming next. [20] Dissent had reached a dangerous level and some form of accommoda- tion was necessary. Supporters and detractors of the Enlarged Program
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 201 then met in order to work out their differences during a combined meeting of the New Jersey and Pennsylvania Library Associations in Atlantic City, April 30-May 1, 1920. It was agreed to set aside 50 percent of the funds collected toward an endowment, although donations for specific activities would still be permitted. The wisdom of emphasizing the endowment feature was questionable; some potential donors would be reluctant to contribute money for unspecified, long-range programs [19]. Chairman Hill and John Cotton Dana resigned from the committee shortly before the Atlantic City meeting. Hill cited the pressures of his job as the reason for resigning, but Dana was more candid: the circular letter had undermined the credibility of the Enlarged Program [16, p. 821. To reconcile the various points of view, a Joint Committee on the Enlarged Program was appointed at Atlantic City. Chairman of the new, thirteen-member committee was William N. C. Carlton of the Newberry Library. The wounds were apparently healed and the fund drive would proceed without interruption. A "re-statement" of the Enlarged Pro- gram was issued by the joint committee on May 17, 1920 [21]. This report, incorporating the endowment provision, differed little from the original document except for a new section on adult education and a revised statement on special libraries. On June 7, the report was unani- mously adopted by the membership at the annual conference in Col- orado Springs [221. Denouement Even before the Chicago meeting, planning was under way to develop a national campaign organization. Following the precedent of the two wartime fund drives, a national advisory council was created, and re- gional and state directors were appointed. Hill tried to persuade Frank Vanderlip, president of the National City Bank of New York and war- time head of the Library War Council, to chair another advisory council, but this time Vanderlip declined because of business commitments [23]. J. Randolph Coolidge, trustee of the Boston Athenaeum and an articu- late spokesman for the cause of libraries, accepted the post of chairman of the national advisory council. Other influential citizens agreeing to serve on the council were Raymond B. Fosdick, former director of the Commission on Training Camp Activities; John R. Mott of the Young Men's Christian Association; and Mrs. Josephine C. Preston, president of the National Education Association. Most of the ten regional directors were former stalwarts of the Library War Service; among these were Charles F. D. Belden, Boston Public Library; Mary Titcomb, Washing- ton County (Maryland) Free Library; and Milton J. Ferguson, California State Library.
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY During the war, the American Library Association remained aloof from the Special Libraries Association (SLA). When SLA learned that special libraries were mentioned in the various Enlarged Program documents, it lodged repeated protests with ALA regarding its exclusion from a voice in policy formulation. Finally, in February 1920, the associ- ation sanctioned the formation of a joint ALA-SLA committee on the Enlarged Program. After this recognition, the SLA covered Enlarged Program activities in its journal, Special Libraries, and urged members to support the program and the financial campaign [24, 251. Experienced fund raisers and publicity experts were engaged to run the campaign from New York. Overseeing the campaign organization was Elmore Leffingwell, longtime head of publicity for the Salvation Army. Speaking at the first conference of regional directors on February 9, 1920, Frank Hill was cautiously optimistic: "It is really a momentous occasion. It is a serious time for you, for me and for the association. We are starting out on something new, and yet a continuation of the work which we have been doing for the past three years. It is a perilous venture that we are undertaking, but one which I am sure is bound to end in success. Even if we do not get a dollar we are going to put the libraries on the map.. ." [26]. By March 1920 there were between twenty and thirty persons on the Enlarged Program payroll [ 16, p. 771. As in the wartime campaigns, a newsletter, the A.L.A. Blue Letter, was published to keep members and local libraries abreast of progress. Fourteen issues of the newsletter appeared between January 17 and June 15, 1920 [27]. The term Enlarged Program seemed a bit austere, and in February the slogan "Books for Everybody" was introduced. None of the newsletters carried information about the debilitating quarrel within the association. At least half a dozen publicity pamphlets were printed, some of which were slanted toward particular audiences. Some of the more ambitious pamphlets were entitled How Books for Everybody of the A.L.A. Will Help Solve Local Library Problems, Universal Education through Books for Every- body, and Talking Points about Books for Everybody. The most attractive pamphlet, Books for Everybody, was designed for mass appeal. On the cover of this 16-page color leaflet was a picture of three immigrants looking up at a tower of books. The caption read, "Good Books Make Good Citizens" [27]. The newsletter and the pamphlets were supplemented by a publicity blitz in the general press. Near the end of April, it was reported that more than 2,000 newspapers and almost 100 magazines had run stories, often illustrated ones, about the Enlarged Program. Coverage in the general circulation magazines was extensive, including Good Housekeep- ing, Outlook, and the Saturday Evening Post. Farm and trade journals were also receptive to the publicity releases. Accounts of the Enlarged Pro-
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 203 gram appeared in such diverse publications as the American Lumberman, the Drovers' Telegram, the Nautical Gazette, the Orange Judd Farmer, and the Underwear & Hosiery Review [28]. Circulation of these specialized journals frequently exceeded the readership of local newspapers. By fall 1920, the number of magazine articles and newspaper items about the Enlarged Program was estimated at 300 and 10,000, respectively [29, p. 777]. Although war-related programs were scheduled to receive the largest amount of funds, these activities were not stressed in the publicity. General adult education, library extension to unserved areas, and Americanization were accented as the major services and benefits to be expected from a successful Enlarged Program. Millions of adults, espe- cially women and young persons, would benefit from the self-study courses which would be prepared. The fact that over 60 million Ameri- can residents were without adequate library service was incorporated into nearly every magazine story and newspaper account. Publicists for the Enlarged Program were not above pandering to the public's anxieties. Except for German-Americans, immigrants were not generally mistreated during the war. Afterward, the hyphenated nationalities became a "menace" as the Red Scare of 1919-20 swept the country. Frederic W. Keator, Episcopal bishop of Tacoma, Washington, and a member of ALA's national advisory council on the Enlarged Program, believed that libraries should play a vital role in combating the pernicious influence of bolshevism on immigrants [30]. As the following quotation from a press release demonstrates, leaders of the Enlarged Program viewed public libraries as bastions of social control and civic purity: "In these days of social and industrial unrest we are beginning to open alarmed eyes at what we term the 'menace of the unassimilated foreigner,' and to voice growing concern over a problem which the public libraries of America have long been working quietly to solve. Out of the present welter is emerging a tardy appreciation of the value of the public library as the bridge by which the immigrant may pass from old world traditions and prejudices to American ideals" [31]. This vast outpouring of publicity had little chance to succeed without the unified support of ALA members and a receptive public. Neither of these prerequisites was sufficiently present. Scheduled to terminate on June 30, 1920, the campaign lingered on for months. As of July 12, the Enlarged Program had netted only $58,000 in cash and pledges [32]. Three days later, the Committee on Enlarged Program was discharged and the program was transferred to the executive board. Already re- sponsible for the residual war work, the executive board reacted to the inheritance of the Enlarged Program as a "peculiarly perplexing" situa- tion [33]. The executive board decided to terminate the fund drive on
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY November 30, and by December the dimension of the failure was pain- fully clear. Only $50,702 had actually been collected [34, 35]. Disap- pointed, but scrupulous to the end, Milam honored his pledge of $200 .by making a final payment of $100 on May 3, 1922 [36]. Anatomy of a Failure Fresh from the intoxicating experience of two successful financial cam- paigns and widely praised service to several million soldiers, the associa- tion appeared ready to believe that an expanded postwar program was not only desirable but achievable. Since the wartime programs would be continued pending their transfer to the government, the temptation to create a parallel program of civilian library services proved irresistible. After all, even the temperate Putnam had told the members at Asbury Park that ALA had emerged from the war as a "public service corpora- tion" [37, p. 263]. And so without adequate planning, an Enlarged Program was formulated during the summer of 1919 and approved by the executive board in September. Early criticism of the Enlarged Program was sporadic; most of the carping was directed at such peripheral issues as the rumors of a reloca- tion of ALA headquarters to New York and constitutional revision. By the time of the special session at Chicago in January 1920, the opposition was powerful enough to impose severe limitations on the program. There would not be an intensive campaign, and no quota system would be permitted. Substantial disenchantment was evident in the circular letter of March 31, 1920. As a result of this complaint, the executive board decided to allocate one-half of the money raised for a permanent endowment. The executive board and the Committee on Enlarged Program over- estimated the membership's readiness to support an independent pro- gram. Although approved by the executive board, the Enlarged Pro- gram was not discussed by the membership until June 1920. Because of the patriotic focus of the war, criticism of the powerful Library War Service bureaucracy in Washington was muted. After the war, the as- sociation reverted to its tradition of endless debate on every issue. Many members were not receptive to the idea of an assertive executive board or to the prospect of another bureaucracy in New York. This fear of centralized authority was very much on the mind of William F. Yust, Rochester Public Library, a signer of the circular letter: "A committee of 5 tells a board of 7 to decide that an Association of 4,000 members shall go after $2 million from 100 million people" [38]. If the situation is likened to the Senate fight over the League of
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 205 Nations, it may be said that the Enlarged Program had its supporters, reservationists, and irreconcilables. The supporters, many of whom served in the Library War Service, constituted at most a simple majority of the association. Probably one-quarter to one-half of the members were reservationists, alarmed over certain features of the program. Continuation of the war-related activities, for example, appeared to some members as a responsibility of the federal government. Despite the apparent harmony after the restatement of the program in May 1920 and the unanimous approval at Colorado Springs, about 300 irreconcil- ables abstained from the fund drive, and their lack of participation was fatal to the campaign [29, p. 776]. Aside from the individual viewpoints of the members, other factors militated against a favorable outcome. From 1917 to 1920, 1,710 libra- rians had reportedly left their jobs for more lucrative careers [39]. Active support of the Enlarged Program was surely difficult for those libraries suffering from acute staff shortages. The economy was slipping into a postwar slump, and the public was weary of the numerous charitable fund drives. Many of these campaigns, especially the nonfederated ones, failed to reach their quotas. There is no disguising the fact that the Enlarged Program met a humiliating defeat, but not everyone was disillusioned. Charles Comp- ton, in New York throughout the campaign, referred to the episode as a "reckless adventure," one which "shall always remain in my mind a noble adventure and it is good at times . .. for librarians to attempt the impossible" [16, pp. 73, 83]. For Milam, the Enlarged Program pin- pointed new "targets" to follow in subsequent years [40, pp. 122-23]. Out of the debacle emerged a period of salutary reappraisal, with em- phasis on the structural reform of the association, the recruitment of new members, and the development of less ambitious programs. The dream would be deferred. REFERENCES 1. Young, Arthur P. "The American Library Association and World War 1." Ph.D. dissertation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1976. 2. Noggle, Burl. Into the Twenties: The United States from Armistice to Normalcy. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1974. 3. Shapiro, Stanley. "The Twilight of Reform: Advanced Progressives after the Armis- tice." Historian 33 (May 1971): 349-64. 4. "Committee of Five: On a Library Survey." Bulletin of the American Library Association 13 (March 1919): 32-33. 5. Milam to Brown, June 2, 1919, War Service Committee, Record Group (hereafter
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY WSC, RG) 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALA Archives, University of Illinois Library, Urbana (hereafter ALAA). 6. American Library Association. Papers and Proceedings of the Forty-first Annual Meeting of the American Libra?y Association Held at Asbury Park, NJ., June 23-27, 1919. Chicago: American Library Association, 1919. 7. "Preliminary Report of Committee on Enlarged Program for American Library Ser- vice." Library Journal 44 (October 1919): 645-63. 8. "Constitution of the American Library Association." Library Journal 44 (November 1919): 721-24. 9. [Editorial.] Library Journal 44 (November 1919): 688. 10. Hadley, Chalmers. "The Proposed Enlarged Program of the A.L.A." LibraryJournal 44 (December 1919): 753-54. 11. "Publicity for the A.L.A. Enlarged Program." LibraryJournal 44 (December 1919): 788. 12. Sparks, Claud G. "William Warner Bishop: A Biography." Ph.D. dissertation, Univer- sity of Michigan, 1967. 13. "At Chicago." Library Journal 45 (January 1920): 55-56. 14. "Revision of the Constitution." Library Journal 45 (January 1920): 76-77. 15. "The Enlarged Program Proceedings." Bulletin of the Amenrcan Library Association 14 (January 1920): 2-9. 16. Compton, Charles H. Memories of a Librarian. St. Louis: St. Louis Public Library, 1954. 17. "An Explanation." March 16, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 18. [Circular Letter.] March 31, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. Also published in Library Journal 45 (April 1920): 363-64. 19. [Editorial.] Library Journal 45 (May 1920): 453. 20. "Some Reasons Why the People Are Opposed to the Financial Campaign of the A.L.A." [1919 or 1920]. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 21. "A Restatement of the A.L.A. Enlarged Program and Budget submitted by the Joint Committee." May 17, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 22. [Editorial.] Library Journal 45 (June 1920): 560. 23. Hill to Vanderlip. December 17, 1920. Frank Vanderlip Papers, Columbia University. 24. Friedel, J. H. "Special Libraries in the Enlarged Program." Special Libraries 11 (January 1920): 1-6. 25. Friedel,J. H. "A.L.A. and S.L.A. Reach Agreement." SpecialLibraries 11 (March 1920): 90. 26. Minutes, Committee on A.L.A. Enlarged Program, Conference of Regional Directors. February 9, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/21, box 2, ALAA. 27. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), and Enlarged Program Committee, RG 92/10/10, ALAA. 28. [Milam, Carl H.] "Report of the Secretary of the Committee on Enlarged Program on the Appeal for Funds." April 27, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 29. Carr, John F. "A Greater American Library Association." Library Journal 45 (October 1920): 775-78. 30. "Librarians Name Campaign Chiefs." New York Times (February 13, 1920). 31. [Enlarged Program Press Release.] February 29, 1920. WSC, unprocessed item, ALAA. 32. "Final Report of the Committee on Enlarged Program as It Was Presented to the Executive Board July 15, 1920." WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 33. "An Open Letter from the Executive Board to Members of the American Library Association." September 25, 1920. WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 34. "American Library Association." Library Journal 45 (December 1920): 987-90. 35. "Books for Everybody Fund 1919-1920." WSC, RG 89/1/72, box 1, ALAA. 36. [Books for Everybody Fund Ledger, 1919-22.] WSC, RG 89/1/72, box 1, ALAA.
WORLD WAR I AND ALA ENLARGED PROGRAM 207 37. Putnam, Herbert. "Statement of the General Director, A.L.A. War Service." Bulletin of the American Library Association 13 (July 1919): 261-63. 38. Yust, William F. "Shall the Executive Board Rule the American Library Association." [nd.] WSC, RG 89/1/5 (vol. 40), ALAA. 39. "Library Workers Quitting." New York Times (March 18, 1920). 40. Sullivan, Peggy. "Carl H. Milam and the American Library Association." Ph.D. disser- tation, University of Chicago, 1972.