A (Re)Positioning Librarians: How Young People View the Information Sector Roma Harris and Margaret Ann Wilkinson This paper was presented at the ALISE 2001 Annual Conference. More than 2,000 students entering their first year of university studies completed questionnaires about the work roles, future employment prospects, educational requirements, status, and start- ing salaries of twelve occupations. Their responses were compared with U.S. and Canadian government labor-force projections. The results revealed a complex interplay of gender rela- tions in the students' perceptions of the occupational world and their roles within it. The results also revealed an interesting positioning of the job title "librarian" relative to other fields. Unlike their assessment of the other occupations included in the study, the students considerably underestimated the level of education required to be a librarian (most did not believe that librarians require a university education). They also underestimated librarians' average starting salary and rated the occupation's social status and future prospects to be lower than the other job titles. Taken together, the results indicate that young people beginning their university studies hold views about career prospects in the information sector that are consistent with some labor- force analysts' views of occupational winners and losers. The students see status, opportunity, and success to be attainable in fields such as computer engineering and systems analysis. Unfor- tunately, they view the occupational present and future for librarians in a somewhat dimmer light, a worrisome result in view of labor-force data that suggest reasonably strong salary and employment opportunities for this occupation in both the United States and Canada. The implications of these findings for library and information science (LIS) education are discussed in the context of gender and identity politics. Introduction To say that librarianship is in a state of flux could hardly be more of an understatement. Rarely is an issue of a library and informa- tion science journal released in which concerns aren't expressed about the pace and meaning of change and the future of libraries and the profession. For instance, commenting on a study about public librar- ies, Estabrook observed that library leaders are optimistic but anxious. They see opportunities for public libraries to marry traditional services with digital formats but worry how libraries can find a competitive niche in the rapidly changing information environment. They recognize the potential for libraries to provide new services and edu- cate people to use new technologies, yet fear there is no broad leadership in the profession to meet the challenges of competition and change. Not surprisingly, there is no consensus.1 If there is no consensus among library leaders, it is not surprising that the public, too, is unclear about the future of libraries. According to Estabrook, "the public's view of libraries is complicated to assess and Fall 2001 289
290 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Roma Harris is Professor, Faculty of Information and Media Studies, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, and Margaret A nn Wilkinson is Asso- ciate Professor, Faculty of Information and Media Studies and Faculty of Law, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. potentially worrisome," especially since "computer ownership and bookstore usage is highly correlated with library usage, our strongest users are also those who can most easily find substitutes for libraries."2 The theme of survival appears repeatedly in the LIS education literature. Some authors suggest that librarians (and libraries) should adopt new roles and acquire new skills in order to preserve their turf, while others urge the formation of new professional identities, even to the point of abandoning librarianship altogether. An example of a relatively modest call for change is Estabrook's encour- agement of librarians to be "politically savvy" and to "develop new services but ones shaped to the traditional roles the public values."3 She writes, the advantage of each library attending to the needs of minority users, building collabora- tions, and using technology to preserve com- munity culture is that none of these strategies requires public libraries to change radically from something they have not been or to become something new. Instead, they allow libraries to build on historic strengths, to use new information technologies to become more relevant to their communities, and to extend their influence.4 Taking a similar approach, i.e., building on preexisting strengths, Newton and Dixon suggest that "there is a need to examine the profession's new roles much more broadly if information professionals are to highlight their unique contribution to managing the new information environment and facilitat- ing end-user access to online information." Arguing that "until recently the literature on professional change has tended to be limited in its horizons and aspirations," they claim that "within the new information envi- ronment, where electronic information is increasingly central, there is opportunity for information professionals to distinguish themselves as experts, not in technology but in the organization of the information medi- ated by the technology." Newton and Dixon urge librarians to renew and extend "their traditional skills within an environment centered on electronic information" to ensure "their continued professional relevance."5 Winter also argues for a different empha- sis in the preparation of librarians: In a world where knowledge and culture producers, along with consumers, are very specialized, librarians and other distributors must themselves be very specialized in order to cope with some basic realities of profes- sional work at the end of the century .... Specialization is also required to colonize appropriate new niches to replace the older ones that are now occupied by new groups of workers. In increasing levels of specialization, librarians can recover some lost ground by defining exclusive new jurisdictions as autono- mous domains of expertise.6 Winter recommends pursuing subject specialization in greater depth and diversity, as well as: functional and format specialization. If librar- ians are able to rethink the problems of classi- fication, cataloging, and bibliographic control in ways that make new and emerging fields more accessible, and thus promote more mutual awareness of possibilities for collabo- Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 29 1 ration where specialized researchers may not have noticed them, they will simulta- neously define new landscapes of technical services and new services for users.7 Van House and Sutton have taken a more extreme position, claiming that the traditional focus of LIS practice and education on the library as an enterprise and an institution largely remains the controlling factor in defining the arena of professional practice in the eyes of both the profession's members and the public. This is true despite the broad potential application of this knowl- edge base in a range of contexts beyond the library (e.g., business and government), a trend in LIS education toward expanding its market to other information functions and organiza- tions, and the decline in library jobs, especially those in the public and quasi-public sectors such as public and university libraries.8 They propose that to survive, "LIS education needs to (further) decouple itself from libraries" because "without a rapid response and fundamental change, LIS education is likely to go the way of pandas: cute, well-loved, coddled, andnearing extinc- tion."9 And, while not exactly predicting extinction, Whitney says of the declining membership in the Association for Library and Information Science Education, "while 'hemorrhaging' may be an overstatement at this time, 'leaky boat' is not."10 Given what seems to be a sense of impending catastrophe, it is not surprising that around the world, schools that have traditionally prepared librarians for entry to the profession are being reshaped. For example, the Florida State University School of Information Studies (prior to 1997 the School of Library and Information Studies) has started a new program, leading to an undergraduate degree in information studies. According to Sherron and Landry "this new program emphasizes the user's perspective as well as the use of information technology" and the "the information studies graduate is a facilitator of access to information."11 At the University of California at Berke- ley, the School of Information Management and Systems is the transmogrification of what was formerly Berkeley's School of Library and Information Studies. The school's Web site makes the following declaration: "The information revolution has created the need for a new kind of professional: someone who is skilled in locating, organizing, manipulat- ing, filtering and presenting information. The mission of the School of Information Management and Systems is to educate such information managers."12 In Australia, the Department of Informa- tion Management and Library Studies at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) has "undergone fundamental changes in mission and objectives" since the mid-1990s and now has been repositioned to attract students "who are more technically and commercially oriented than our tradi- tional LIS entrants" by focusing on "knowl- edge management programs." In one of these programs, a graduate diploma in Document Management: Knowledge Management, students "analyze the nature of knowledge, its characteristics, and its role and signifi- cance in a business environment."13 Knowl- edge management has also been adopted as an emphasis in the School of Information and Media at the Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, Scotland.14 Along with programs in information and library studies, the school houses a Centre of Knowledge Management with a mission to enable organizations to build sustainable competitive advantage through management of knowledge. In 1998, at the University of Pretoria in South Africa, the Department of Informa- tion Science (having earlier changed its name from the Department of Library and Information Science) was integrated into the School of Information Technology. The school offers undergraduate programs lead- ing to a bachelor's in Internet Studies (B.IS) in library and information science, publish- ing, information science, or multimedia. Fall 2001
292 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Bothma and Britz describe the transition as one of moving from "a fairly traditional LIS school to an open department that offers extensive opportunities to any information professional, as well as to all other students who need information skills to obtain a competitive advantage in a predominantly information-based industry."15 What is behind these global changes in approach to the field? According to Van House and Sutton, LIS is engaged in a struggle with other profes- sions and academic disciplines both for juris- diction over the information functions that have traditionally been the problem domain of LIS and of the emerging information func- tions brought about by changes in technology and society. The primary reasons for this struggle are twofold: first, changes in computing and telecommunications; and second, the increasing strategic importance of information in our economy and in society more generally.16 Of course, the struggle for turf and economic power in the information society goes far beyond the roles of libraries and librarianship. As Hamelink writes, "World communication politics is increasingly defined by trade and market standards and ever less by political considerations. There is a noticeable shift from a predominantly political discourse to a largely economic/ trade discourse . . . and the locus of much policy making shifted from governments to associations of private business sectors." Indeed, Hamelink notes, "it is no surprise that information and communication technol- ogy governance is shifting to a global trade forum given the increasing economic value of communication networks and information services."1 7 Taking up a similar theme, Birdsall and Rasmussen argue that national infor- mation policies that encourage citizen access to the information highway seem to have as their main motivation the preparation of citi- zens to be consumers rather than effective political actors.18 According to Hamelink, "the globaliza- tion of the new world order is characterized by social Darwinism and fragmentation . . . greatly facilitated by a conservative libertar- ian belief system that is broadcast widely across the globe by the world's largest communication conglomerates."19 These conglomerates are becoming increasingly powerful in shaping our thoughts. As Bagdikian points out, "a handful of mammoth private organizations have begun to domi- nate the world's mass media." These "lords of the global village have their own political agenda. All resist economic changes that do not support their own financial interests. Together, they exert a homogenizing power over ideas, culture and commerce that affects populations larger than any in history."20 Just what are some of these ideas? One key notion is that of privatization, i.e., that "the world's resources are basically private property and that public affairs should be regulated by private parties on free markets,"21 a notion clearly extant, for example, in the development of national information policies. The ubiquitous presence of business interests in the form of transnational corpo- rations restricts the policy options of national governments, especially those in the devel- oping world. In countries such as India, local business elites push for economic liberalization and the opportunity to collabo- rate with transnational corporations while at the same time benefiting from cheap local labor and infrastructure.22 In other words, they support liberal trade policies and conservative (even regressive) labor policies. The result in India, where there is enormous national support for the information economy after nearly a decade of work in a liberalized economy, is that the vast majority of Indian workers in the information economy are subject to the global "race to the bottom" in wages and unprecedented price hikes for basic goods and services. In this setting, a more probable future for the major- ity of those employed in India's information economy is work as part of the expanding Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 293 disposable labor force.23 Labor practices in India's information sector are also seen in some American high- tech industries. As Colclough and Tolbert observe, one important source of flexibility utilized by high-tech industries and many other industries is geographic movement or capital mobility. By subdividing the production process into standardized components that require limited worker skill to complete, firms can relocate later stages of production to areas where labor costs and lower and/or new markets are emerging. In many cases, the new source of labor may be offshore.24 The result is a two-tiered occupational structure in high- tech industries ... the rapidly expanding top tier of management, technical, engineering, and research and development personnel in the United States is congruent with . . . primary labor market jobs - good jobs, high pay, extensive benefits, and avenues for mobility. The labor-intensive production tier of many high-tech firms exhibits classic characteristics of secondary labor markets - low skill, low wages, few benefits, little job security, and limited opportunities for mobility. It is these secondary labor market jobs in which women and, increasingly, racial and ethnic minorities are employed.25 Libraries are also affected by trends in the new economy. As Hildenbrand indicates, the information industry, a major winner in the new economy, has an impact on libraries in two ways: it lobbies vigorously for a tax structure that is inhospitable to all institutions that rely on public support and, also, it markets its products as efficient, time-saving, and labor-saving, making them attractive to underfunded public bureaucracies. And gifts, none of which are free if processing and learn- ing time are calculated, are judiciously made to build allegiance to particular systems.26 Underfunding, combined with aggressive marketing of new information technologies, has had an impact on how public institutions are managed. In health care, for example, "the term 'corporatization' has been used to characterize the entrance of large capitalist corporations into the production of medical services, the development of alternative provider organizations, and the reorganiza- tion of community hospitals through the introduction of more rationalized systems of management and bureaucratic control."27 Similarly, in social work "globalization has provided the impetus for the move away from publicly funded welfare provisions to commercial enterprises run by private entrepreneurs, loss of a public-service ethic, reduction in the power and influence wielded by professionals in determining welfare policy and provisions, [and] a deprofessionalization of professional skills." The complexities of social work have been fragmented by managerial practices through which tasks are divided "into discrete components which can be done by workers holding lower-level qualifications," a situation that enables employers to control workers more easily and pay them less. The result has been that "a profession which suffered from a low professional status because it has been considered women's work, has a workforce made up largely of women although men control its higher managerial echelons and is relatively undertrained and underpaid as a result, has been forced even further downward in the professional status stakes."28 Similar managerial strategies and result- ing deprofessionalization have also been reported in librarianship (see, for example, Harris and Marshall).29 As Winter explains, librarianship presents a case in which a number of functions originally assigned and carried out internally have now split off into newer occupational groups which have grown so much that they are now taking over substantial parts of the old 'qualitative' domain. The most dramatic example is the Fall 2001
294 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science library assistant, whose functions originated in the more clerical end of technical services and which, thanks to automation and other trends, have now colonized much of the routine task areas of acquisitions and catalog- ing within libraries. Simultaneously, the core areas of professional expertise in cataloging have substantially migrated to the biblio- graphic utilities which now produce the cata- log record that was originally the province of the catalog librarian.30 According to Winter, "at present, this picture is clearest in technical services, but if library assistants continue to expand into other areas of work once reserved for professionals, the trend could easily appear in public services."31 If we re-read the changes recommended to the practice of librarianship and to LIS education in light of the claims by Hamelink32 and others about the privatization of information and the shaping of national information policies by private sector interests, it does not seem unreasonable to conclude that a new discourse is being shaped around the profession that supports the privatization of information and the repackaging of the skills of librarians into those of "infopreneurs." In this connection, it is interesting to look again, for example, at the new programs introduced at the University of Pretoria. Bothma and Britz claim that "South Africa is a blend of first-world and third-world features. The training in library and informa- tion science, therefore, must make provision for students who want to work in a high- technology environment as well as for students who are not interested in technol- ogy but want to work at grass-roots level, such as in community information in rural areas."33 In this model, evidently, the library program accommodates the needs of the old or traditional "third world"34 while the other programs are connected with the new or "first world." How are these ideas about the informa- tion professions reflected in the labor force projections of North American governments as they plan for the new economy? In Canada, changing information and commu- nication technologies have resulted in a "widespread need for knowledge and mana- gerial expertise" and a concomitant decrease in the need for "data, services and goods workers."35 Gera and Masse report that in Canadian manufacturing, "high-knowledge and technology-intensive industries have experienced the highest employment growth. In addition, an increasing proportion of employment is accounted for by industries that require workers with more skills and that pay higher wages. In contrast, low-knowl- edge, low-technology, low-wage, and low- skill industries have shed jobs."36 According to Gera and Masse, employ- ment in "high-knowledge" industries is more resistant to cyclical downturns than in others, and this sector "contributed much more to employment growth than medium- and low-knowledge industries between 1986 to 1991, accounting for 41.2% of total job gains over this period in Canada."37 Similar conclusions are echoed in other labor- force studies. For instance, Betcherman and Chaykowski report that over the past 25 years, "the proportion of knowledge workers has grown substantially in the Canadian economy" across all major indus- try groups. They also point to the dominance of certain occupational groups. "The engi- neering category of occupations increased at a higher rate than that of total employ- ment over the last two decades." In the last decade, "engineers became an important substitute for other occupations in the whole economy" reflecting "an increasing need for engineers to solve widespread ICT-induced complexity which was formerly nonexistent or solved by other types of expertise." Additionally, the computer science category of occupations "was the group of occupa- tions with by far the most rapid rate of growth in the knowledge category of occu- pations," reflecting "the explosion of computer technology throughout the economy."38 Given the patterns of occupational Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positloning Librarians 295 growth and decline described in these studies, it is not surprising that projections of the fastest growing occupations in the coming decade by Human Resources Devel- opment Canada and the United States' Bureau of Labor Statistics suggest that those who plan careers in the information sector (as database administrators, computer engineers, or systems analysts, for example) or in health-care services (as physical or occupational therapists, for example) should find very good opportunities for employ- ment. Indeed, these fields are predicted to be among the top ten occupations in employment growth in the coming decade.39 Within the information sector, however, along with the employment "winners," some occupations are expected to lose ground because of the "shift away from occupations which primarily require routinized handling of information toward occupations which required nonroutine handling of information."40 According to Martin, even though the information workforce continues to grow and while opportunities are better in occupations involving nonroutine informa- tion work, "growth is strongest among occupations that produce information." Information workers categorized as "distribu- tors," including "public information dissemi- nators" such as librarians and archivists, will encounter a slowdown in opportunities in the coming decades as technology plays a role in routinizing their labor. On the other hand, "producers," includ- ing "private information service providers" such as lawyers and "science and technical workers" such as scientists, mathematicians, systems analysts and engineers," will find increasing opportunities as technology permits them to apply nonroutinized skills.41 Martin's analysis suggests that the future is brighter for information workers who attach to the private sector than the public and that librarians will have fewer opportunities than other information workers who are perceived to have greater "high-tech" skills. In this changing scene in which some occupations are rising in prominence while others decline, how do young people who are beginning to prepare themselves for a career view the structure of the information society and the opportunities it presents? In the study reported here, students enter- ing their first year of university studies were asked a series of questions about twelve occupations in the information and health sectors. The questions explored the students' perceptions of work roles and future opportunities in traditional career roles such as lawyer and librarian as well as emerg- ing careers such as computer engineering. The students' perceptions are compared with Canadian and U.S. occupational fore- casting data. Method During the summer academic orientation program for incoming first-year students at a large Canadian university, one of eight brief questionnaires was distributed randomly to students who volunteered to take part in a research investigation entitled "Career opportunities: 2000 and beyond." In total, 2,047 students completed one of the eight questionnaires, each of which was completed by at least 250 students. The students comprised a homogenous group, with no differences between the groups com- pleting each questionnaire with respect to age (M = 1 8.69 years, SD = 1 .43), distribution by sex (60% women, 40% men), or intended program of study. The questionnaires included items concerning the work roles, future employ- ment prospects, educational requirements, status, and starting salaries of twelve occu- pations chosen to include traditional profes- sions, occupations practiced predominantly by men or women, as well nonprofessional and emerging occupations in the informa- tion sector: lawyer, reporter/news corre- spondent, internet researcher,42 paralegal, animator, systems analyst, librarian, data- base administrator, announcer/newscaster, physical therapist, computer engineer, and Fall 2001
296 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science medical records technician. The occupa- tions reflect the divide between information sector work that focuses on either quantita- tive or qualitative data. According to Winter, "accountants, management engi- neers, statisticians, operations researchers, and systems analysts, for example, deal with quantitative information, while librarians, along with many academics and journalists, and some business specialists like advertis- ers, deal with information in its qualitative aspects."43 Results Students were asked to describe the level of education required for each occupation and to rate its social status on a scale of 1 to 100, with 100 representing the highest possible status in comparison with all other types of work. Their responses, shown in Tables 1 and 2, reveal that while more than 90% of incoming university students think lawyers and computer engineers require university degrees and 50% think internet researchers require some university education, 60% of the students believe that librarians require no university education. Given these beliefs about educational requirements, it is not entirely surprising that the students assigned the lowest social status to the occupation librarian and the highest to lawyer and computer engineer, followed by physical therapist. Curiously, status ratings do not neces- sarily correspond precisely to whether the students perceived an occupation to be a profession. While 98% of the students described the occupations lawyer and computer engineer as professions and 62% perceive the job librarian to be a profes- sion, only 50% classified internet researcher as a profession. The students were asked how much computing knowledge is required in each occupation (see Table 3). Interestingly, they perceived the occupation librarian to require less knowledge of computing than the occupation internet researcher even Lawyer 82 98% Computer engineer 82 98% Phys ¡cal thera ipist 75 96% Reporter , 70 76% Systems analyst \ 69 87% Announcer/Newscaster j 69 72% Internet researcher 62 50% Animator | 64 82% Database administrator i 63 \ 79% Medicai records 62 63% technician Paralegal 61 75% Librarian | 46 j 62% Table 1. Students' Ratings of Occupational Prestige and Professional Status Volume 42, Number 4
(Repositioning Librorians 297 !____._ IctwÌÌStS^ ACTUAL j EDUCATIONAL EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS REQUIREMENTS* (most frequently selected I category) LAWYER university professional degree (95%) university professional degree | COMPUTER university professional degree (49%) university ENGINEER professional degree PHYSICAL university professional degree (45%) university THERAPIST professional degree REPORTER university degree (39%) typically, university degree or community college diploma -^- ™__^ uniVersity degree (49%) typ ícaííy, TTÍ^^^rsity degree or community college diploma ANNOUNCER/ community college diploma (42%) typically, university NEWSCASTER degree or community | college diploma | INTERNET community college diploma (51%) not available RESEARCHER ANIMATOR community college diploma (59%) typically, university degree or community college diploma DATABASE university degree (41%) undergraduate or ADMINISTRATOR graduate university degree ____^^ ^^ __^^ _ TECHNICIAN PARALEGAL university degree (34%) university, college or in-house training LIBRARIAN community college diploma (32%) typically, university professional degree *Data source: Province of Ontario Table 2. Perceived and Actual Educational Requirements though, it might be argued, both occupations involve very similar types of work. The students were also asked to estimate the percentage of women who are employed in each occupation. Table 4 reveals that they estimated the percentage of women employed to be highest in the occupation librarian and lowest in the occupations internet researcher and computer engineer. The students' perceptions of an occu- pation's status tended to be inversely related to the proportion of women it employs. For Fall 2001
298 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Lawyer 2.97 Reporter/news 3.76 correspondent Internet researcher 4.79 Paralegal 3.34 Animator 4.42 Systems analyst 4.78 Librarian 3.60 Database administrator 4.66 Announcer/Newscaster 2.98 Physical therapist 2.72 Computer engineer 4.88 Medical records 4.17 technician Table 3. Perceptions of Computing Knowledge Required by Occupation *Based on 5-point scale; 1 =very little computer knowledge and 5=a great deal. instance, the students assigned their high- est prestige ratings to the occupations lawyer and computer engineer, both of which they estimated to be among the lowest with respect to the proportion of women employees. On the other hand, they accorded relatively high status to the occu- pation physical therapist, a field that they also believed to be female-intensive (although their estimates of women's partici- pation in this occupation are lower than the actual rates). The students reserved their lowest status rating for librarian, the occu- pation in which they perceive the greatest number of women to be employed. Commensurate with social status (and coincident with their perception of the presence of fewer women), the students, especially the men, believe that the occupa- tions lawyer and computer engineer attract the greatest starting salaries (see Table 5). Two-thirds of all the students (68%) believe that beginning lawyers earn up to $65,000 per year (5% believe they earn more than $90,000 to start) and nearly 50% believe that computer engineers earn starting salaries up to $80,000. Three-quarters of the students believe that internet researchers earn begin- ning salaries up to $50,000, whereas 71% believe librarians earn starting salaries up to $35,000. In comparison with actual starting salaries, the students are overly optimistic, consistently overestimating the initial earn- ings of members of every occupation, with the exception of librarian, an occupation that actually attracts higher earnings than most of the others. Librarians' beginning salaries, which the students expect to be low- est of all the twelve occupations, are as good as, or in some cases, better than the salaries in occupations that were most highly regarded by the students. When asked about future employment prospects, specifically, whether the number of jobs in each of the twelve occupations is growing, staying the same, or shrinking, the Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 299 I Occupation Students' Province of Government of j Estimates Ontario data: Canada data: I women in women entering I professions professions Lawyer Z ~ ~ 40% " * | 25% * " ~ ' 52% __ ~ ^J Computer engineer " """*" 30% " ^ * 1 3%T * " _ T2^"!! __ Z"~"Z"' : i^^^ ""~ " zz " zz """*" ^?^r ~" í 8zí""_t" _ l_ji?^ tzizzizzì JReporter ""~ " ~Z~ 7"5"0%7 ~" 46%J " Z Í"~45%Z_ Z "*> Systems analyst 7 4°% [31% " _"í*2]% '7 1 ! i'i^noiimer/í^scas^ _ 50%^ ^'J^7""777"' l*5% 77""".. I! Internet researcher ^ 30% notavailaNe \ not available ìjD^ima^' ^ Z3 "7...' -Z ^ .' ,i..ri j°*l i j ' 4f¡?L._rjr'-..' .ii?.%z.i.. "" zr.i '" . .i- "* Database administrator ^ 50% _ ' 23%. - J?2% "" '" . "* • Medical records technician 50% " _ j no^availabìe - ) 99% ^ ^ . rJParaíegal^ ""2" Z."" *"" " ZZ " ZI ^°1 " ZZ"75%L "Z. Zl^!lZ""ZZ ^ ^ • "ub^ian]7""™ Z ZZ *"" " «J " Zl??^ Í82^JZ" "7ZTz^_-ZZZ ZZZZJ Table 4. Percentage of women employed **This figure includes college graduates who are in policing technologies, security protection technologies, penal correction technologies, paralegal technologies, and who are legal assistants. | Occupation Expected starting salary Actual starting I (% of respondents) salary* Lawyer " " " "'" "" ~~ <365,000 (64%) *"~ $39,100 ^ Computer engineer ' "" " "'" "" "' '""' ^""<$8O000 ¿7%f "" *"~ _ """ $?^0? ^ "" ¡ f Physicaítherapist _ ' "" "" _ _ " "' _ '""' ^$65^000' (70%) "" '_ _ """ Jt35^" 7° "" j Reporter _ "' "" _ [ _ " _ "<$56,000"""(77%j "Z""" *2I'Z2?ZZ"Zj Systems analyst "' 7_ * Z ' -$Í?Í22? (^2°/o) „ ^5?^?° « _ "l Announcer/Newscaster 7Z7 "77 * 1J ' '^50^cT']69%)777 ZZ'ZWIZ^ZZZ „ « _ ZJ Internet researcher „„„ ,_ , _. ^$50^000 J76%) _ _ . n¿a_ __. _j ^Animator.. „. „„„ ,_ , „. _. ^$ 50,000 JZ3%) _ _ . Í2LZQ0_ii^__l __. Database administrator ^$50,000 ,[73%). _ ,„ „„ ^Sl^ÁQCL^ _J Medical records " technician "" "" áí^9j9MJI3^ $25£400_____ "paralegal " "" "" " ' -$50,0P0 (75%) ^ ^2§/70°^^ -Librarian ^ J " ' ZT ^??5i9P°. JZÌ %) ""__ ^ ZI l^'2^0 Table 5. Expected versus actual starting salaries *Data source: Government of Canada Fall 2001
300 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science students indicated that opportunities are growing for internet researchers, animators, systems analysts, database administrators, physical therapists, and computer engineers but staying the same for lawyers, reporters/ news correspondents, announcer/newscast- ers, paralegals, and medical records techni- cians (see Table 6). The only job market they perceive to be shrinking is for librarians. The students' projections are, by and large, consistent with forecasts made by the Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada, and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. All three governments agree with the students' perceptions that there will be a growth in opportunities for computer engi- neers, systems analysts, and database administrators. The Canadian government is more optimistic in its prediction for librar- ians (steady) than either the students or the Ontario government. Only the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics shares the students' optimism about employment growth for physical therapists, and it is alone in Lawyer Steady Steady Steady (67%) Computer Growing Growing Growing ^ Engineer (94%) Physical Therapist Growing Steady Steady %/ (58%) Reporter Steady Steady Shrinking (72%) Systems Analyst Growing Growing Growing t/ (80%) Announcer/ Steady Steady Shrinking Newscaster (78%) Internet Growing N/A N/A Researcher (96%) Animator Growing Growing Shrinking (63%) Database Growing Growing Growing ^ Administrator (71%) Medical Records Steady N/A Shrinking • Technician (92%) Paralegal Steady Steady Steady • (83%) Librarian Shrinking Shrinking Steady (61%) Tableó. Occupational Growth Potential: Students' Perceptions and Government Projections Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 301 predicting growth for medical records tech- nicians and paralegals. The students were asked whether, in their future careers, they would prefer to be work- ing in government, the private sector, or to be self-employed. They expressed a clear preference to work in the private sector (39%) over the public sector (19%), with the largest number of students hoping to be self- employed (42%). The students were also asked to estimate, for all the people who work in each occupation, the percentage employed in the private sector, in govern- ment, or who are self-employed (see Table 7). Their perceptions about librarians are again revealing. The students perceive librar- ians to be self-employed much less frequently than workers in all the other occupations and to be employed in the government sector more often than workers in all the other occupations. The students were asked to indicate which of various tasks form a regular part of the work of each occupation. Items most frequently regarded to be the regular work of librarians included educating users about libraries and library services (93.6% of respondents), checking in and checking out library materials (92.8%), classifying and making files or catalogs of library materials (91.2%), selecting and ordering library materials (87.6%), and shelving library materials (82.5%). In other words, the students tended to ascribe to librarians work that, in most libraries, is performed by clerks and other nonprofessional staff. It is useful to contrast the students' perceptions of tasks performed by librarians with those they believe to be performed by Internet researchers. Table 8 reveals that while they perceived some commonalities in the two occupations, the students regarded Internet researchers to be more involved in "high tech" activities than librarians, such as conducting information searches from electronic sources, designing computer systems, and maintaining Web sites, as well as more involved in the production of information, such as conducting research and writing reports and proposals. Discussion The results of this study reveal that young people who are beginning their university studies have formed impressions of the world of work that are consistent with Martin's assessment of the information sector's occupational winners and losers. The students predict, as does Martin, that information "producers," i.e., science and technical workers (including systems ana- lysts and engineers), as well as private information service providers (including lawyers and legal assistants), will experience better opportunities than information "distributors," especially those who, like librarians, work as public information disseminators.44 The students' perceptions of the occu- pation "librarian" are less than flattering and they regard the work of librarians to be less technically challenging than that of other information occupations, such as Internet researcher. The majority of the students aspire to work in the private sector, and they believe that most workers in the higher-tech information occupations are employed in this sector whereas librarians are employed predominantly in the public sector. They not only accord higher status to what they perceive to be higher-tech, private sector occupations, but they also perceive these occupations to offer the greatest compensa- tion and future job opportunities. The students believe that while the majority of librarians are women, most Internet researchers, computer engineers, and systems analysts are men. In a 1988 study, Harris and Sue-Chan45 found that the greater the number of men thought to be working as librarians, the higher the status people were willing to accord to the profes- sion. These gendered lenses through which librarianship is viewed are still very much in evidence. In the present study, students ascribed the lowest status, earnings poten- tial, and educational requirements to librarianship, the occupation they perceived to be the most female-intensive. Librarian Fall 2001
302 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Occupation Self- Government Private | employed sector ; Animator 28.22 14.60 _ ' 57.10 ; ¡^ralegal^^ /^'~"'[ 7I1ZZ "*"*""" 'l^ZZZ'^JiL _ 77 ' ^^77777 [ Systems anai^sr' 7 "*"*""" "20.58"" 32. Ì7 47.37 ; I Announcer/Newscaster " 7 .78 ^ 21-^ ^0.56 ": ! Lawyer " 32.02"" 29.45~7J__^" _39;>8_' ""JJ_" 1 I Database administrator ^974 33.40 46.77 « Internet researcher *"'" ""J"" "" ''33.74""'""" ' "" 26J7""" """"" 39:88 s Computer engineer' *"'" "" 20.29 ' 2775 """"" "51 .96 ! ^libirarian^"""** " ' *~*""'^ " *" "'¿703""*" '""" **" "'6lTf" " " """32^48 "^ " ì^ical'ther^^ --- - """"3Ì - .51*"* J - **" - ""*30.72""""* J^l?-??""" *"" "7111 Reporter/News --- - - y^- - - -y-- *"" 62T88™"" "1 I correspondent Medical records technician I ' 9J8OJ J "J" 7"* .?Í-M777«I173J?-?Í77 7777! Table 7. Mean Estimates of Percentage of Workers Employed in Government, Private Sector, or Self-employed Task Librarian Internet ( I Researcher | 1 Conduct info searches from printed reference books 64.5 63.1 \ I Conduct info searches from electronic sources 71.0 98.4 Educate the public about info issues (Librarian) 59.6 66.7 Educate the public about the Internet and info I resources (Internet Researcher) Supervise Staff ' *"" """'*■*'" "457 197Ó"" ; Conduct research 26.7 94.4 i F°L™^ 40.2 40.9 _ ; Write reports & proposals 28.7 67.5 \ Prepare & analyze budgets & financial statements 24.3 17.7 Design computer systems 8.4 68.1 Maintain websites 34.3 90.8 Table 8. Students' Perceptions of the Work Tasks of Librarians and Internet Researchers (percentage of students who regard task to be regular part of work role) Volume 42, Number 4
(Repositioning Librarians 303 was also the only occupation the students assessed to be declining in terms of future employment opportunities. Despite the apparent disfavor with which the students regard librarians relative to other information workers such as internet researchers, on close examination, it might appear, especially to librarians, that there is little to distinguish between the actual work performed in some of the more favored occupations. For example, librarians are involved in facilitating access to information for their clients/customers, the same role expected of graduates from the new Florida State Information Studies Program,46 as well as the knowledge management students who will graduate from the RMIT's Department of Information Management and Library Studies in Australia.47 Newton and Dixon argue that the new economy has made possible an opportunity "for information professionals to distinguish themselves as experts, not in technology but in the organization of the information medi- ated by the technology." These skills to which they refer, i.e., cataloging, classifica- tion, and indexing, are, of course, the root or foundational skills of the librarian. According to Newton and Dixon, one of the problems facing librarianship is the popular and problematically gendered stereo- type of the librarian as a spinsterly and authoritarian naysayer over-concerned with regulations and maintaining a hushed library environment. While the stereotype bears little relation to the real work and diverse identities of actual library and information profession- als ... there may still be a credibility gap between the current status of the information professional and the key educational roles to which they aspire.48 An additional problem, according to Van House and Sutton, is that "the habitus of LIS, derived from libraries and the public sector, may disadvantage LIS in its competi- tion with professions and educational programs that are more accustomed to competition for domain."49 In other words, the association between librarianship, women's work, and the public sector situ- ates the profession poorly in the informa- tion workscape. Many of the leading writers in LIS education are calling for new approaches to the preparation of librarians that will build the skills necessary for the profession's survival in the new economy. Winter, for example, makes a case for diversity and greater subject specialization, as well as "functional and format specialization."50 Others focus on new roles for libraries that pose an implicit challenge for the profession- als who staff them. For example, Cline writes, research libraries have held significant roles in research and education: selecting and organiz- ing materials for collections; developing systems of intellectual access; organizing items for physical access and retrieval; and preserv- ing items for long-term use. These attributes signified a durability that is now challenged in today's fast-paced digital environment of networks, Web interfaces, and proliferating search engines. We cannot ignore the rapid acceleration of digital dependence in all aspects of education and research, nor can we overlook the researcher's need for perma- nence, reliability, and continuity in this digital environment. Thus as we look to the new century, we must shape an information envi- ronment that has sustainable systems of access to enduring information resources so that users, now and in the future, can rely on them with confidence.51 The type of skills envisioned here clearly require the profession to attract gifted and accomplished individuals. Yet, how is it possible to recruit these sorts of people if the general view of librarianship, even within LIS education itself, is that it is an occupation in decline and that the institu- tion it serves is about to become an anach- ronism? In the study described in this article, beginning university students, i.e., the next generation to enter the labor Fall 2001
304 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science pool, expressed a clear preference to work in the private rather than the public sector in which they believe the majority of librarians are employed. Furthermore, among the information professions, they situate librarianship as a woman's occupation with poor career prospects, little status, and low earnings potential. The students' views suggest that the repackaging of librarians' skills under the labels "information professional," "internet researcher," or "knowledge manager" may position the occupation more favorably, but at what cost? Will attracting new entrants to a field positioned as a private sector infor- mation profession yield any librarians, i.e., skilled people willing to work in librar- ies? And, will shedding the profession's feminized label and emphasizing high tech- nology enable current LIS workers to over- come status problems and reap the rewards of the burgeoning information economy? Henwood reported "no evidence to suggest that women are benefiting from the widespread diffusion of the new technolo- gies, through increased access to 'new tech- nology jobs. ' Whilst it is the case that women are finding their way into some new areas of work as a result of these changes, these are new areas of 'women's work,' with all the low status and lack of prospects that such segregation implies."52 Henwood 's observa- tions highlight the fact that the way in which "jobs come to be recognized as requiring skills or involving responsibilities is a social and not a technically determined process." In fact, "differences in skill and job content are not the main cause of the differences in pay between men and women; full-time women workers are ... systemati- cally lower-paid than men after adjusting for any differences in skill composition of jobs."53 In other words, as long as women are present in any significant numbers in an occupation, regardless of the technical skills required in their jobs, the work they do will come to be devalued relative to those occupations or sectors in which men predominate. In the current study, the students' perceptions, albeit sometimes exaggerated, match the reality of trends in the emerging information society. For instance, their views are consistent with representations of the future in advertisements for information tech- nology products in which women are often depicted either as mere onlookers in the presence of new technologies, or in menial, routine work roles, whereas men are often portrayed to be controlling technologies in their roles as visionaries who are crafting the future.54 Dilevko's results, and the findings of the present study, raise troubling questions about the future of women and women's work in the new economy. Two aspects of current discourse about LIS education bear thinking about in light of this study. The first is the connection between new high-tech information programs and the preparation for private sector work. Just as Hamelink, Bagdikian, and others suggest, the political agenda of transnational corporate interests seems to have been successful in persuading young people, and members of the LIS community, to valorize the private sector over the public.55 The second is the relationship between the presence or absence of women and the future of particular types of informa- tion work. Just as in Dominelli and Hoogvelt's description56 of the transformation of British social work, it appears that the type of infor- mation work typically performed by women librarians is increasingly regarded as a thing of the past, and may be destined to be deskilled and relegated to the low-paid, low- status realm of the public sector. References and Notes 1 . Leigh S . Estabrook, "Polarized Percep- tions," Library Journal (Feb. 1,1997): 46-48. 2. Ibid., 46-47. 3. Ibid., 47. 4. Ibid., 48. 5. Robert Newton and David Dixon, "New Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 305 Roles for Information Professionals: User Education as a Core Professional Competency Within the New Information Environment," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 40, no.3ü999i:151.152. 154. 6. Michael F. Winter, "Specialization, Territoriality, and Jurisdiction: Librarianship and the Political Economy of Knowledge," Library Trends 45, no. 2 (1996): 355. 7. Ibid., 356. 8. Nancy Van House and Stuart A. Sutton, "The Panda Syndrome: An Ecology of LIS Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 2 (1996); reprinted in JELIS vol. 41, no. 1 (2000): 54. 9. Ibid., 66. 10. Gretchen Whitney, "Library and Information Science Educators: Mem- bership Trends in the Association for Library and Information Science Educa- tion, 1986-87 to 1996-97," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 1 (1998): 38. 11. Gene T. Sherron and Marie B. Landry, "Reinventing the Bachelor's Degree: Call it 'Information Studies!'" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 40ü999):49,50. 12. www.sims.berkeley.edu/about (August 2,2001). 13. William Martin, "New Directions in Education for LIS: Knowledge Manage- ment Programs at RMIT," Journal of Education for Library and Informa- tion Science 40 no. 3 (1999): 142, 146, 148. 14. Newton and Dixon, "New Roles for In- formation Professionals." 15. Theo J.D. Bothma and Hannes J. Britz, "Library and Information Science Education at the University of Pretoria, South Africa," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 4 1 , no. 3 (2000): 233. 16. Van House and Sutton, "The Panda Syndrome," 52. 17. J. Cees Hamelink, "Human Rights in the Information Society: Civic Participation in Shaping the Future," in Citizenship and Participation in the Information Age, ed. Manjunath Pendakur and Roma Harris, Toronto, Ontario: Garamond Press (forthcoming). 18. William F. Birdsall and Merrilee Rasmussen, "The Citizen's Right to Com- municate," in Citizenship and Partici- pation in the Information Age, ed. Manjunath Pendakur and Roma Harris, Toronto, Ontario: Garamond Press (forth- coming). 19. Hamelink, "Human Rights in the Infor- mation Society." 20. Ben H. Bagdikian, "The Lords of the Global Village," The Nation (June 12, 1989): 805, 807. 21. Hamelink, "Human Rights in the Infor- mation Society." 22. Ramaswami Harindranath, "Software In- dustry, Religious Nationalism, and Social Movements in India: Aspects of Globalization?" in Citizenship and Par- ticipation in the Information Age, ed. Manjunath Pendakur and Roma Harris, Toronto, Ontario: Garamond Press (forth- coming). 23. Paula Chakravartty, "Laboring to Be a Citizen: Trade Unions, Public Interest and Cyber-populism in India," in Citi- zenship and Participation in the Infor- mation Age, ed. Manjunath Pendakur and Roma Harris, Toronto, Ontario: Garamond Press (forthcoming). 24. Glenna Colclough and Charles M. Tolbert, Work in the Fast Lane: Flex- ibility, Divisions of Labor, and Inequal- ity in High-Tech Industries (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992), 18-19. 25. Ibid., 21. 26. Suzanne Hildenbrand, "A Review Article," Library Quarterly 66, no. 4 (1966): 466. In other words, gifts of access to the information highway sup- port particular forms of consumption. 27. Robert L. Brannon, Intensifying Care: Fall 2001
306 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The Hospital Industry Profession- alization, and the Reorganization of the Nursing Labor Process (Amityville, New York: Baywood Publishing Company, 1994), 1. 28. Lena Dommelli and Ankie Hoogvelt. "Globalization and the Technocratization of Social Work," Critical Social Policy 16 (1996): 45, 56. 29. Roma M. Harris and Victoria Marshall, "Reorganizing Canadian Libraries: A Giant Step Back From the Front," Library Trends 46, no. 3, (1988): 564-80. 30. Winter, "Specialization, Territoriality, and Jurisdiction," 353. 31. Ibid., 354. 32. Hamelink, "Human Rights in the Infor- mation Society." 33. Bothma and Britz, "Library and Informa- tion Science Education," 324. 34. Note, however, that according to Bothma and Britz, the department holds "the firm belief that computer literacy is essential for survival in the information age - even if a person does not intend working in a high-technology environment." Bothma and Britz, "Library and Information Science Education " 236. 35. Marie Lavoie and Richard Roy, Employ- ment in the Knowledge-Based Economy: A Growth Accounting Exercise for Canada. R-98-8E, Research Papers Series, Applied Research Branch Strate- gic Policy, Human Resources Develop- ment Canada (Hull, Quebec: Human Re- sources Development Canada, 1988), 3. 36. Surendra Gera and Philippe Masse, Employment Performance in the Knowl- edge-based Economy. Industry Canada Working Paper No. 14 Human Resources Development Canada (Hull, Quebec: Human Resources Development Canada, 1996). 37. Gera and Masse, Employment Perfor- mance, 13. 38. Gordon Betcherman and Richard Chaykowski, The Changing Workplace: Challenges for Public Policy. R-96-13E. Research Paper Series: Applied Research Branch, Strategic Policy, Human Resources Development Canada (Hull, Quebec: Human Resources Develop- ment Canada, 1998), 33, 45-46. 39. United States Bureau of Labor Statis- tics, 1998-99 Occupational Out- look Handbook, http://www.bls .gov /news, releas e Yooh.news.htm (Washington, D.C. : U.S. Department of Labor, 1999), Table 1. 40. Stana Martin, "Information Technology, Employment, and the Information Sector: Trends in Information Employ- ment 1970-1995," Journal of the American Society for Information Science 49 (1998): 1053-69. 41. Martin, "Information Technology," 1064. 42. The occupation internet researcher was first encountered by the authors on the Web site of Syracuse University's School of Information Studies as a po- tential career destination for graduates of the school's programs. 43. Winter, "Specialization, Territoriality, and Jurisdiction," 352. 44. Martin, "Information Technology." 45. Roma Harris and Sue Chan, Cataloging and Reference, Circulation and Shelving: Public Library Users and University Students' Perceptions of Librarianship," Library and Information Science Research 10 (1998): 95. 46. Sherron and Landry, "Reinventing the Bachelor's Degree," 40, 48-56. 47. Martin, "New Direction in Education for LIS," 142-50. 48. Newton and Dixon, "New Roles for Information Professionals," 154, 158. 49. Van House and Sutton, "The Panda Syn- drome," 66. 50. Winter, "Specialization, Territoriality, and Jurisdiction " 356. 5 1 . Nancy M. Cline, "Virtual Continuity: The Challenge for Research Libraries Today," Educause Review 35, no. 3 (2000): 28. 52. Felicity Henwood, "Microelectronics and Women's Employment: An International Perspective," in Women and Information Technology, ed. Marilyn J. Davidson and Volume 42, Number 4
(Re)Positioning Librarians 307 Cary L. Cooper (Toronto: John Wiley, 19871115. 53. Sara Horrell, Jill Rubery, and Brenda Burchell, "Gender and Skills," in Skill and Occupational Change, ed. Roger Penn, Michael Rose, and Jill Rubery (Oxford University Press, 1999), 190,220. 54. Juris Dilevko, "As the World Turns: Women, Technology and Advertise- ments in the Wired World," Ph.D. diss. (The University of Western Ontario, 1988). 55. Hamelink, "Human Rights in the Infor- mation Society;" and Bagdikian, "The Lords of the Global Village." 56. Dominelli and Hoogvelt, "Globalization and the Technocratization of Social Work." Fall 2001