Faculty and Student Perceptions of Distance Education Using Television DANIEL D. BARRON This paper includes a description of the evolution of the distance education efforts of the University of South Carolina College of Library and Information Science, and the results of a study of the students who participated in those courses. Analy- sis of the data gathered indicated, among others, that there appear to be some differences in the various modes of instructional delivery in the perceptions of the students and faculty, but the benefits of distance education, especially using tele- communications technology, is a viable alternative for the delivery of library and information science education. THE PURPOSE of this article is to present background infor- mation related to the use of telecommunications for instructional deliv- ery by the University of South Carolina College of Library and Informa- tion Science (CLIS) and to report on one study of its apparent effectiveness. In the literature searches for information to help the CLIS faculty make decisions regarding the use of telecommunications and in prepara- tion for this article, the author was surprised by the lack of information available related to the decision-making processes in our library and in- formation science education programs. The case study presented here, while it does not represent a systematic description of all of the various elements that make up the decision-making process, is an effort to pro- vide for both a report of the evaluation of a specific element of one pro- gram as well as information related to the conception and evolution of that element within the program. Daniel D. Barron is an Associate Professor and Coordinator of the School Library Me- dia Program, University of South Carolina College of Library and Information Science, Columbia, SC 29208. Spring 1987 257
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science BACKGROUND In spring 1982, the college offered LIBR 797J, "Sharing Literature with Young Children," using open-circuit television. This telecourse was developed and produced by the college under the title, "Jump over the Moon: Sharing Literature with Young Children." (See preceding article by Pamela Barron in this issue.) In fall 1982, the college offered LIBR 703, "Foundations of Information Sources and Services," using interactive television. These were the first courses in what has become a regular part of the college's response to the distant learner in South Car- olina. Since then, the college has offered more than 20 for-credit courses, which have involved more than 400 individual students. At the time of this writing the college provides two interactive televised classes over a statewide closed-circuit system each semester and two telecourses over statewide open-circuit television each semester. In addition to the televised classes, the college has produced statewide teleconferences on censorship, library automation, and school library media center scheduling. The faculty have participated also in three other teleconferences sponsored by the South Carolina State Depart- ment of Education on copyright and microcomputer software evalua- tion. Need for Distance Education Program. The need for some sort of away- from-the-home-campus response to the initial and continuing education needs of people in the state was evident almost from the founding of the college. This need resulted from the desires of women and men who were well qualified and greatly interested in completing the master's degree, renewing their certificates as school library media specialists, and partic- ipating in organized continued learning experiences, but whose family and job-related concerns prevented them from attending the Columbia campus on a regular basis. Many of these individuals were practicing librarians who wanted the knowledge and financial advantages resulting from an advanced degree and continuing education. Since many of these persons were employed in jobs that were relatively inflexible dur- ing the regular work day and since they had other family and personal demands on their time, even the availability of evening and summer classes on the Columbia campus was not sufficient to meet their needs. The needs expressed by these men and women represented the same needs expressed by groups in our society that a number of authors have pointed out must be taken into consideration by leaders in higher educa- tion if they hope to meet their own social responsibilities to those inter- ested adults, as well as to enjoy the benefits that come from those adults' participation directly in higher education.1 Diversity by Design was an im- portant text at the time of the college's decision making and remains an important work for all of those in higher education planning for a future among the many concerns and issues addressed by the Carnegie Com- 258 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions mission on Higher Education that are not yet resolved.2 Faculty Response. The faculty responded by offering courses on an ir- regular basis at sites other than the Columbia campus, but there was a need for a more carefully planned program that would include the major population centers in the state. On a faculty vote in 1976, it was decided to take selected courses to sites around the state; these courses were to be delivered in traditional classroom settings. This was well received by the students, and both faculty and students agreed that the academic quality of the courses was high enough to continue the efforts. For the first few years faculty taught these courses on an overload basis, but since 1979 all courses have been taught within the regular teaching loads of the faculty. There were two major problems encountered in the distance educa- tion efforts. The first, of course, was the limited number of resources available to the students away from the good collections in the Columbia campus library. The decision was made early that the college would offer courses away from the Columbia campus, which used the same syllabi, made the same demands on students, and required the same resources as the courses taught on the Columbia campus. The college promised de- livery of the class - not the course - to the local site. In other words, the faculty would bring classes to the students at more convenient locations and times than those on the Columbia campus and would make every effort to provide resources locally to support the class. The student, how- ever, had to, and still must, realize that some resources must be retrieved personally through interlibrary loan or by traveling to a library whose collection supports the instruction. Every effort was, and is, made by the college to eliminate the old criticism of "extension" courses, where courses are tailored to the availability of local resources more than to the knowledge and skill demands of the courses' intended purposes. Fortunately the university offers excellent support services to the fac- ulty. The units within the university that support the academic pro- grams in their efforts to provide for the distant learner include Graduate Regional Studies, Office of Telecommunications Instruction, the In- structional Services Center, and the Library Processing Center. Gradu- ate Regionali Studies and the Office of Telecommunications Instruction provide logistical services and some limited finances to purchase unique resources for the specific sites at which a class is delivered. The Instruc- tional Services Center provides the technical expertise, including stu- dios and the full range of production and consultation services, needed for telecommunications delivery. The Library Processing Center, whose title describes poorly what has become a vital information and materials switching center, provides interlibrary loan and other net- working services to libraries that support classes located on the nine campuses of the university. It must be noted here that there is a develop- ing interest among many librarians related to the service of off-campus populations. In fact, a series of conferences have been undertaken within Spring 1987 259
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science the past few years to facilitate those interested in this topic as well as the development of a Discussion Group within the Association for College and Research Libraries.3 Several members of the Library Processing Center have participated in these events. Even with this fine support, students, then and now, find it necessary to come to the Columbia campus to complete some assignments. But these visits can be planned for weekends or evenings, which may allow for safer travel and more convenience for students as they coordinate work and study schedules. Few students are more than two-and-a-half hours from Columbia, so the burden is not so great, especially consider- ing that they have the class delivered more locally and that they need to travel to the Columbia campus only a few times. This is in comparison with having to attend classes for 15 weeks one day each week at the Co- lumbia campus, usually at night, and having to return there on another day or night of the same week to complete assignments. The second problem encountered was the limited time in any given semester during which faculty could take a full day to travel to a remote site, conduct class, have local office hours, and still maintain their re- sponsibilities on the Columbia campus. This made the college's efforts seem unfair to some students and, in fact, to the faculty. The fiscal re- wards for faculty initially came from the overload salary they were able to collect. However, with the decision to keep all teaching within the reg- ular load, no additional money was available. This compounded the problem. The promise of television delivery was suggested. As the college's faculty wrestled with the idea of using television as a delivery medium for graduate courses, many factors were taken into consideration. The availability of technology was not an issue, since the university has access to very sophisticated systems that have been used by its various colleges, including education, engineering, business ad- ministration, and social work, to deliver courses and, in limited in- stances, whole graduate degree programs. Also, the Office of Telecom- munications Instruction was available to the faculty. The office promotes the courses and provides for logistical support, including reg- istration, mailing of textbooks and syllabi, photoduplication, and toll- free telephone access to faculty by students. In addition, the office pro- vides faculty with counseling in instructional design and media utilization. Review of the Literature. A review of the literature available at the time the faculty was involved in the decision-making process revealed only two articles that reported the activities of other library and information science programs in telecommunications. One, by Bruce Shuman, de- scribes the use of closed-circuit television for one course at one school.4 That school, by the way, continues its use of televised instruction. The other, by Jill May, describes some of the developments and evaluations of a videotaped course in children's media.5 Two articles by Wender and 260 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions Berk describe uses of telecommunications technology in other aspects of continuing education.6 Since the initial literature search, only one addi- tional article, by Darlene Weingand, has appeared, which reports on the use of telecommunications in library and information science educa- tion.7 The initial literature review revealed relatively few articles or reports of studies; however, those that were available were very positive and of- fered a number of suggestions and conclusions that were useful to the college. Since then, a number of studies and reviews in the literature of such related areas as adult learning,8 instructional media utilization,9 and higher education for adults10 have supported the concept of using telecommunications to deliver instruction. The classic study by Evans published in 1968 with a follow-up in 1982 provided invaluable insight into the nature of faculty responses to the use of television as a delivery medium.11 The study included descriptions of the decision-making process and the psychological barriers encoun- tered in using technology. Another study by Rockhill has been published since the original literature search in 1980 and deserves attention by any academic unit or institution intending to develop a distance education program.12 Generally, the literature suggested that teleconferences have become commonly accepted events in higher education's efforts to provide for the continued-learning needs of its clients, but televised delivery of classes, especially in graduate education, are considered with more hesi- tation and suspicion by some educators. The use of innovative methods or new delivery technologies by community colleges, undergraduate programs, and in efforts to reach adult, nontraditional audiences enjoy a considerably positive portrayal and have been shown to be both aca- demically and societally valuable. Graduate education, on the other hand, has not been a major focus of most nontraditional efforts to reach beyond the central campus. Conversations with faculty in other units of the university that were already involved in telecommunications instruction were favorable also. These early conversations have led to what has become a university- wide support group that provides informal opportunities for instructors to share ideas, concerns, and techniques. The group also provides a fo- rum for discussion and debate, which has lead to advocacy for the uni- versity's distance education efforts. Currently, this informal group in- cludes the colleges of education, social work, public health, nursing, and library and information science. As an important secondary benefit to the college, the process of using telecommunications has contributed greatly to the college's visibility and networking among these other aca- demic units in the system. Implementation of Courses. Dirr has pointed out that the major barriers to the use of television are (1) lack of money to support the effort, (2) lack Spring 1987 261
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of faculty commitment to the use of the medium, and (3) lack of trained support staff.13 Since the university's telecommunications system was in place, with a highly trained technical support staff available and a highly committed logistical support staff offering their services, and since the system and its staff were available free of charge to the college, the only remaining element was faculty commitment. The college was founded on the basis of innovation in education and has enjoyed a generally open-minded and risk-taking faculty; therefore, the notion of trying something fairly radical was not a great issue. Since the mode of delivery was essentially untested, the major concern of the faculty was the same as for any new course or other innovation: making sure that the intellectual and academic integrity be maintained. The decision to offer the telecourse "Sharing Literature with Young Children' ' had been approved by the faculty, but the decision to use tele- vision to deliver information as in a traditional classroom seemed to be a much more difficult one. It should be noted here that there was reluc- tance on the part of some faculty to commit themselves to the concept, and considerable debate among the faculty preceded the decision, but when the decision was made, all offered their support. The first course selected for interactive television was the required course LIBR 703 , * ' Foundations of Information Sources and Services. ' ' It was decided that since the course was presented in the traditional class- room primarily using lecture and demonstration, it lent itself well to the capabilities of the studio classroom. The three on-campus, day-long ses- sions built into the course provided the opportunity for such learning experiences as discussion groups and practice of the reference interview. Also, it would reach a very diverse student population that would there- fore provide a great deal of data to support or reject offering additional courses. From that time to the present, every course offered via telecommuni- cations has been treated the same as courses taught in the traditional classroom - the same syllabi, assignments, grading procedure, require- ments, and end-of-term evaluations were and are used with each course. Both required and elective courses have been offered using interactive television, including microcomputer use in school libraries, research methods, selection of nonbook media, administration, collection devel- opment, a school library media professional recertification seminar, in- troduction to bibliographic control, and introduction to information technology. A computer literacy telecourse, produced by the Annen- berg/CPB project,14 is offered as a community service course through the college. The children's literature course mentioned earlier is offered each fall and spring semester. Selected courses offered via telecommunications have been moni- tored a bit more closely than others in the catalog. The first course, LIBR 703, was very closely monitored by the faculty and by a study 262 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions team of students under the direction of the faculty person teaching re- search methods during that semester. Comparisons of grades on proj- ects, examinations, papers, attitudes, and perceptions were made be- tween studio, on-campus students and television, off-campus students. No statistically significant differences were found among any of the vari- ables. Only 2 of the 71 total class members felt that the college should not continue to offer courses via television.15 These 2 students were a part of the 20 who took the course on the campus and in the studio. Both ex- pressed feelings similar to what Shuman referred to as being ' 'vaguely victimized, guinea pigs in an experiment."16 Since then, comparisons have been made of final grades, midterm grades, grades on assignments, resources used to complete assignments (a bibliometric study of student papers), and a wide range of demo- graphic data related to students participating in the courses. These de- mographic data include whether the students were part- or full-time, on campus or in the television classroom, their scores on entrance examina- tions, their GPA before entrance to the college, and others. The compar- isons have proved to be very consistent - there were no statistically sig- nificant differences among the variables selected for study. Aversa warns us: "Though potentially exciting and useful to program planners, action research is not truly evaluation. Nor is monitoring evaluation in the strictest sense. ' '1? These data are important, however, and represent at least the same level of evaluation to which most traditional classroom activities are subjected. True experimental designs for research related to the college's use of telecommunications have been suggested by different faculty and stu- dents, but many factors have prevented them from being carried out to this point. What has been done, however, beyond the amassment of a student data file, is described below. STUDY Methodology. In spring 1986, a survey instrument was sent to a random sample of 100 students taken from a list of the 363 who had taken dis- tance courses from the college since spring 1982. Excluded from this list were those having taken the computer literacy course, since that course cannot be counted toward the master's degree in library and informa- tion science. Faculty who had taught these courses were interviewed as well. The purpose of the project was to gather data on the perceptions of all those involved in the distance education program of the college with respect to academic quality, problems, issues to be addressed, and rela- tive effectiveness of the efforts. A total of 76 usable responses from students was analyzed. For com- parisons, respondents were added to indicate whether they had taken class work on the Columbia campus as well as at another site (43 , or 57 % had) and whether they had taken Columbia campus classes as well as Spring 1987 263
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science television courses (39, or 51% had). Other variables included in the analysis included age, sex, race, and marital status. Follow-up telephone interviews with 20 randomly selected respon- dents were made to verify the information in a more open-ended way. Other telephone calls were made to some respondents who had indicated that they would be available for such calls and who had expressed some relatively negative feelings in the questionnaire. Demographics. Females accounted for 95 % of the respondents; 85% of the respondents were married; 83 % were under the age of 45, with 50 % in the 36-45 age category. Students seeking degrees or recertification credits in the school library media program made up 86 % of the respon- dents, with public librarians or those studying for professional public li- brary work making up 1 1 % of the total and academic library personnel 3% of the total. The reasons for having taken the distance education classes as given by the respondents in the present study match the reasons generally found in the literatures of adult and distance education. Family (76%), current job restrictions (76%), distance from the Columbia campus (84%), and other time constraints (66%) were given by students as rea- sons for participating in the distance education program of the college. As expected, 95% of the respondents indicated that they were part-time students when they completed the distance education courses. This com- pares with the 87 % overall part-time student body in the college during the 1984-85 school year. Questionnaire. Respondents were asked to rank various class elements without reference to mode of delivery or specific course. Those who had taken courses on the Columbia campus and at least one other, by one or both of the other delivery modes - on-site classroom or television classroom - were asked to compare the class elements of the different de- livery modes. Up to the time of this study, faculty evaluations from on-site and tele- vised classes did not indicate significant problems with instructor con- tact, other group interactions, or limited availability of resources that hampered the teaching/learning process. However, for the purposes of this study, it was decided to ask questions about some of these same class elements removed from the context of a specific course. These questions related to (1) amount and quality of contact with the instructor, (2) com- fort in asking questions in class, (3) comfort in participating in class dis- cussions, (4) feelings of involvement, (5) amount and quality of contact with other students, (6) development of local peer support groups, (7) availability of resources to complete assignments, and (8) general feel- ings toward the various delivery modes and the college. A tradition in the college has been the collegiality with, and concern for, students as people rather than just as numbers and faces. This was one of the reasons that the study focused so much on the perceptions of 264 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions feelings and other social functions in the class. Robin Moss points out that "one of the problems associated with distant learning is the lack of social and emotional support provided by the conventional teacher- and- class. Adult learners tend to lack confidence and to lose heart easily; dis- tance learning can be a lonely experience."18 Also, as Shuman pointed out in his 1973 study, "Feelings of inhibition, frustration, or detach- ment were common to all students in the televised course, while such feelings were almost totally absent in conventional classroom stu- dents."19 Table 1 contains information related to the respondents' perceptions of various class elements based on their overall experiences in the college to the time of the questionnaire. Table 2 contains information related to the comparison of various class elements among the delivery modes by respondents who indicated that they had taken at least one course on the Table 1 . Respondents ' Rankings of Class Elements Based on Their Overall Experience in Courses in the College Percent of Responses Element 12 3 4* Amount of instructor contact 36 57 4 3 Quality of instructor contact 36 60 1 3 Amount of peer contact 38 56 1 5 Quality of peer contact 40 58 2 0 Comfort in asking questions 33 55 9 3 Comfort in class discussions 33 57 6 4 Availability of resources 23 59 14 4 *Depending upon the wording of the question, the ranking was 1 to 4 (high to low) with "Ample to Non- Existent," "Very Good to Very Poor," and "Very Comfortable to Very Un-Comfortable" used in the text. n = 76 Table 2. Respondents' Comparisons of On-Site or Television Class Elements with Columbia Campus Class Elements Percent of Responses About No Better Same Worse Opinion Element OS TV OS TV OS TV OS TV Amount of contact 26 0 60 66 11 34 3 0 Quality of contact 19 0 74 76 7 24 0 0 Comfort in questioning 16 5 82 51 2 41 0 3 Comfort in discussions 19 0 79 56 2 40 0 4 Persons gotten to know 33 26 48 28 17 44 2 2 Unity or groupness 31 26 62 36 7 36 0 2 Involved in course 21 3 69 77 10 20 0 0 Discussion after class 17 23 55 44 21 28 7 5 Peer support group 32 44 48 22 18 28 2 5 Available resources 7 0 63 47 28 51 2 2 Enjoyed course 29 13 59 69 12 18 0 0 OS - On-site classroom respondents n = 43 TV = Television classroom respondents n = 39 Spring 1987 265
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Columbia campus in addition to one or more using the other delivery modes. Contact with Faculty. As the tables indicate, the amount and quality of the respondents' contact with faculty appear to be relatively good or about the same as their experiences in courses on the Columbia campus. In an effort to identify the reasons behind the negative responses, two possible explanations emerged. Data gathered from follow-up telephone interviews seem to indicate that students prefer more traditional class- room contacts with the instructor and, if they have the opportunity, would prefer to attend classes in a traditional classroom at a local site or on the Columbia campus. This appears to be a major reason for the neg- ative reactions to the questionnaire - an affirmation of the traditional rather than so much a negative comment on the innovative. There ap- pear to be no perceptions of significant barriers to the information- transfer process, however, among most of the students. It must be pointed out also that the questionnaire was distributed dur- ing a course in which a significant number of difficulties and concerns were expressed by the students. A total of 20% of the respondents were in that course and, almost without exception, accounted for the negative responses to the questionnaire. The reasons for these negative responses are beyond the scope of the present study, but suffice it to say that what appears to be an anomaly, if course evaluations and informal contacts with students are to be considered, will be the focus of future research and monitoring by the administration and faculty. Questions and Class Discussions. The negative responses in the area of students asking questions and class discussions, especially related to tele- vision, may be a factor of the technology: its distinct difference from the traditionail classroom and the demands on the student to speak into a telephone or microphone. Johnson suggests that other psychological barriers may inhibit distance learners from asking questions and partici- pating in discussions,20 but there is no doubt that some are inhibited by the technology itself. Again, follow-up telephone conversations with stu- dents seem to support the notion that the negative experience they were involved in at the time of the questionnaire had a distinct impact on their responses throughout the questionnaire. Involvement and Peer Support. Respondents were asked to characterize the social environment of the class by indicating the extent to which they felt involved in the course, the extent to which a group feeling emerged from the class, and the extent to which they felt peer support groups were developed during the course. Follow-up telephone interviews provided information that seems to support the basic premise stated earlier that students would prefer the contact of peers, as well as instructors, in a more traditional classroom, but the interviews also indicated that the students felt that information transfer was not hampered significantly. 266 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions Concerning groupness (i.e. , feelings about being a member of the class, a part of the college, a part of the university), the interviews brought out the fact that most of those who indicated that television classes tended to develop this trait less were in the telecourse in which they met as a group on the Columbia campus only three times. Such things as class group- ness or unity under such circumstances were not really possible. Two students pointed out that the question included the words in comparison. They were forced to indicate less because they had participated in the previous summer sessions on the Columbia campus and had exception- ally enjoyable classes; therefore, a comparison, in honesty, could only indicate less groupness, although they felt that the television classes had at least the same groupness as other traditional classes in which they had participated. The college advocates the development of peer support groups with the yet-to-be-tested notion that this could facilitate local networking among libraries of a similar nature, as well as multitype cooperatives. The reason for the apparently better rating in this area by television class students has not yet been isolated, nor have the negative responses been explained. Availability of Resources. One of the major concerns of faculty that sev- eral researchers have pointed out in the literature of distance education is the availability of resources to complete assignments. A possible explanation for the negative response in this area that was revealed in the interviews is that instructors in the college make the same assignments for all classes that carry the same title and course number. In other words, students sometimes had to travel to several different li- braries or to Columbia to complete assignments because the resources to complete the assignments were available only at these locations. Also, the course most frequently taken by students by television is a course in early childhood literature. Often mentioned as a problem by students in course evaluations, as well as the interviews for this project, is the diffi- culty they have in getting children's books for their reading and project assignments. This seems to point to the fact that many of our libraries, public and school especially, have relatively poor collections of materials for this age group, a point that has received a great deal of attention re- cently by public officials in the state. The increased awareness of the problem and the need for solutions can be traced with a fair degree of certainty to the students who participated in the classes. Other questions related to the use of visual materials and relative ef- fectiveness of the instructor were asked, and respondents tended to indi- cate that these were generally the same among the three delivery sys- tems. Respondents were asked to indicate their relative enjoyment of the courses compared to courses having been taken on the Columbia cam- pus. A total of 29% of the respondents indicated that they enjoyed on- Spring 1987 267
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science site courses and 13%, television-delivered courses more than those on the Columbia campus; 59% enjoyed on-site about the same and 69% enjoyed television about the same. Enjoyment was less for 12% of the on-site respondents and 18% for the television courses. When asked if television delivery were not available whether the stu- dent would continue or have continued in her or his course work in the college, 18% said they would, 55% said they would not, and 14% indi- cated that they were not sure whether they would or not. Analysis showed that 15% of the respondents would continue course work even if no distance education efforts were made by the college, 66% would not, and 15% were not sure. Respondents were asked if they would encourage others to take courses from the college; 89% indicated that they would, with only 5% indicating that they would not. Others would be encouraged to take lo- cally delivered courses of the college by 96% of the respondents, and 85 % indicated that they would encourage others to take courses deliv- ered by television. When asked how the college should plan for the use of television in the future, 56% of the respondents indicated that its use should be in- creased, 4% that it be decreased, 23% that it be maintained at the cur- rent level and 17% had not strong feelings one way or the other. It ap- pears from the telephone interviews that the last group represents those persons who were taking advantage of the courses for recertification only, several of whom plan to retire before having to take additional course work. Faculty Interviews. As with any academic program, the quality of dis- tance education through telecommunications or in the traditional class- room depends mostly on the quality of the faculty's ability and on their commitment to the program. Quality is assumed in this report, by the bias of the author and the results of the processes of faculty evaluations. The commitment in the college is fairly obvious. Of the nine full-time faculty in the college, four have been responsible for the development and implementation of one or more interactive television courses. Two others have made major contributions to classes, but they have as yet not offered a course alone. Seven have taught one or more courses on-site at a location other than the Columbia campus. All of those who had taught using television up to spring 1986 were asked to list their major concerns, problems, successes and any issues they felt should be included in an in-depth study of the distance educa- tion program. Most responded with lists that are summarized below. All were contacted by the writer, and, in most instances, more in-depth con- versations took place. Generally, the feelings toward meeting the needs of the people served by the university in this professional area and discipline were strong. Al- most all expressed the idea that they would prefer the ideal of students having the opportunity to take the time to pursue full-time study on the 268 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions Columbia campus. The personali life concerns of students, however, should be taken into consideration. Several persons expressed concern for having to take time from other obligations, especially research, to travel. In addition several classes, both those taught on the Columbia campus and those taught using tele- vision, have gotten very large; that also contributes to the same concerns for distributing faculty time among the responsibilities and interests held. As far as television as a delivery medium is concerned, faculty mem- bers made several points. It was, and remains, a new and different expe- rience that takes a considerable effort to use well. Some, in fact, reported an almost uncontrollable fear of being in front of the camera. A few seem to enjoy the experience while others find it to be very demanding. Some reported that they have had a tendency to go into the studio classroom with more notes and generally a more tightly organized presentation than they do in the traditional classroom. In fact, the classroom versions of their notes are often covered more rapidly when using them with the teleconferencing mode. This could be explained in terms of the teachers feeling a bit more apprehensive about the television cameras being present. It could also be a function of the students asking fewer questions or fewer class discussions. Unfortunately, a conjecture that there are fewer questions and less discussion in televised classes has not yet been proved or disproved, since data related to traditional classroom questions and discussion are not available. Some faculty seem to believe that this is the case, however. Other faculty, who have had more opportunities in the television class- room, report that with some effort and a little creativity class discussions can be held profitably. Some faculty have expressed the notion that they do not like the con- fined feeling of the television studio classroom and prefer being able to move more freely about the room. The extent to which this has an im- pact of faculty performance or student learning is another area for which data are not readily available. Some faculty expressed the idea that they used more visuali materials, notes, and graphics with the overhead camera and used more videotapes than in the traditional classroom because it is easier to have the technical staff show these than it is for the teacher to show them in the traditional classroom. The single most critical problem expressed by faculty was concern for the size of the classes. One person pointed out that the quality of the in- struction was not an immediate question. The individuals in the large classes until now have gotten the same quality education as if the classes were on the Columbia campus. The question asked was, ' 'But how long can the faculty hold out?" The additional time spent by faculty in mak- ing sure that each student gets the attention she or he needs cuts deeply into other areas, as reported above. Also, the additional time and effort Spring 1987 269
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science could lead to ' 'burnout" or, perhaps, "melt down." Only one faculty person so far has had large classes from one semester to the next semester on a fairly regular basis. The technology itself was a source of frustration for some. Technol- ogy has a tendency to break down; since so many people are involved in one class's production, communication and technical assistance break- downs are possible. With the experiences being new and different, any breakdown may be viewed as a disaster and cause the feeling that it hap- pens all the time. In fact, the down time of the system is very small, as is shown by the records of the studio. The talk-back system, while sophisti- cated and representing the state of the art, presents a problem for both questions and discussion. In classes that tend to rely heavily on lecture and demonstration, however, this is a rather minor point. The Office of Telecommunications Instruction provides student as- sistants to stuff envelopes and do mailing for the faculty teaching in the televised classes, but sometimes the mail refuses to cooperate as assign- ments are moved from students to faculty and back to students again. Currently the possibility of using electronic mail is under consideration, but until it is used, correspondence remains somewhat of a problem. Conclusion. i 'Just as one who makes a clearing in the forest is increas- ing the periphery of contact with the unknown, we are only becoming wiser about the scope of the territory we have yet to explore. ' '21 The col- lege has cleared some territory in distance education and the use of tech- nology to meet the educational needs of library and information profes- sionals in South Carolina. There appears to be a great deal of success in the efforts, and both students and teachers are satisfied with the results to date. Academic quality, especially as judged in comparison with existing standards, are acceptable, and effectiveness as judged by the notions of academic quality, accessibilty to students, and faculty time is also ac- ceptable. There is a newness and a difference that must be explored further. The whole nature of the socialization process into the profession, as a function of the initial education program, needs to be examined. In- cluded in this is the notion of peer support groups and their impact on cooperatives outside the academic setting. The dynamics of student in- teraction in the traditional classroom and its importance to the total learning environment requires additional study. The college faculty is committed to the idea of distance education and telecommunications as a mode for its delivery. The students, while tend- ing to prefer the traditional classroom under many circumstances, are also committed to those same ideas. Both groups seem to accept the fact that they are dealing with a developing technology that has shortcom- ings, but also promise; difficulties, but greater potential; many de- mands, but several rewards. Not everyone enjoys it or is totally con- vinced that it is as good as the traditional classroom, but so few data are 270 Volume 27, Number 4
Faculty and Student Perceptions available for comparison, they concede to its value. Both Shuman and Weingand ended their articles on notes of opti- mism. This author, admittedly zealous, also believes strongly in the po- tential of distance education for the profession and in the almost unlim- ited possibilities of technology to bring people and information together for the benefit of all in our society. References and Notes 1 . Birkey , C . J . M . : " Future Directions for Adult Education and Adult Educators, ' 'Journal of Teacher Education 35:25-29 (May-June 1984) and Gilman, F.: "Issues in Adult Education for Edu- cators, ' ' Journal of Teacher Education 35 :61 -63 (May-June 1984). 2. Commission on Non-Traditional Study: Diversity By Design (San Francisco: Josey-Bass, 1973). 3. Those interested should contact Barton Lessin, Central Michigan University Libraries for information related to The Off-Campus Library Services Conferences. The contact for the ACRL Ex- tended Library Services Discussion Group is Lynn LaBrake, University Libraries, University of Central Florida. 4. Shuman, B.: "Teaching a Services and Collections Course Via Closed Circuit Televi- sion, " Journal of Education for Librarianship 14:107-8 (Fall 1973). 5. May, J.: "Copyright Clearance Problems in Educational Television: Children's Materi- als," Journal of Education for Librarianship 17:149-60 (Winter 1977). 6. Wender, R. W.: "Talkback Telephone Network: Techniques of Providing Library Con- tinuing Education," Special Libraries 74:265-70 (July 1983); Berk, R. A.: "The Delivery of Contin- uing Education: Teleconferencing, an Alternative Mode," Bulletin of the Medical Library Association 70:21-27 (Jan. 1982). 7. Weingand, D. E.: "Telecommunications Delivery of Education: A Comparison with the Traditional Classroom," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 74:3-12 (Summer 1984). 8. Lindsay, M.: "Teacher Effectiveness in Adult Education," Journal of Teacher Education 35:2-7 (May-June 1984). 9. Chu, G. C. and Schramm, W.: Learning from Television: What the Research Says (Stanford: Institute for Communication Research, 1969); Schramm, W.: Big Media, Little Media: Tools and Technologies for Instruction (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1977). 10. Roundtree, D.: Educational Technology in Curriculum Development (London: Harper, 1982); Tate, P. J. , and Kressel, M. , eds. : The Expanding Role of Telecommunications in Higher Education (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1983); Wiesner, P.: "Some Observations on Telecourse Research and Practice, ' ' Adult Education Quarterly 33 : 2 1 5-2 1 . 1 1 . Evans, R. I. : Resistance to Innovation in Higher Education: A Social Psychological Exploration Fo- cused on Television and the Establishment (San Franciso: Jossey-Bass, 1968); Evans, R. I.: "Resistance to Innovation in Information Technology in Higher Education: A Social Psychological Perspec- tive," in Sheehan, B. S., ed.: Information Technology: Innovations and Applications (New York: Jossey- Bass, 1982). 1 2 . Rockhill , K . : Academic Excellence and Public Service: A History of University Extension in California (New Brunswick: Transaction Bks., 1983). 13. Dirr, P. J. : Higher Education Uses Television and Radio (Bethesda, Md. : ERIC Document Re- production Service, ED 201 312, 1981), p.8. 14. The New Literacy: An Introduction to Computers, produced by the Annenberg/CPB Project; for information call 1-800-LEARNER. 15. Abel, A., and others: "Telecommunications Survey," unpublished student paper, Univ. of South Carolina, Apr. 26, 1983. 16. Shuman, ref. 4, p. 116. 17. Roundtree, ref. 10, p.323. 18. Moss, R.: Video: The Educational Challenge (London: C room Helm, 1983), p. 114. 19. Shuman, ref. 4, p. 116. 20. Johnson, S. E.: "Faculty Perspectives on Outreach Teaching, "Journal of the American Asso- ciation of Adult and Continuing Education 48 : 1 1 - 1 3 (Spring 1 985). 21. Ferguson, M.: The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: Tharcher, 1980), p. 177. Spring 1987 271