VICTORIAN HORIZONS: THE RECEPTION OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS IN ENGLAND AND AMERICA, 1880-1900' Anne H. Lundin2 This article examines the critical reception of children's books in England and America, 1880-1900. The purpose of the study is to determine the nature and extent of interest in children's books in the formative period of the "golden age of children's literature." Which periodicals covered children's books, and how did their cultural discourse, as revealed through reviewing and commen- tary, shape the norms and assumptions by which children's books were created and evaluated? Seventy-five literary periodicals were studied for their coverage of children's books in this period. The literary periodicals are drawn from Poole's Index, Nineteenth-Century Readers' Guide, and Wellesley Index. Using reception the- ory, a branch of reader-response criticism, I construct the contemporary context in which children's books were received-expressed as "horizons of expecta- tions." A spectrum of cultural discourse included the following horizons: the treatment of children's books as a commodity; the elevation of children's books as works of art; an emphasis on illustration and pictorial effects in literature; a lack of rigid demarcation between adult and children's literature; a growing gender division; a diversification of the didactic tradition; a continuing debate on fantasy and realism; the romantic idealization of childhood and its litera- ture; attention to the historiography of children's literature; and anxiety about the changing character of children's reading. While these concerns informed the larger history of children's.literature, they converged in late Victorian En- gland and America to create a unique climate for the reception of chil- dren's books as a body of literature, a field of study, and a form of expressive culture. From the weekly children's book spread in the New York Times to the yearly sweep by the New Yorker, children's books matter. Whatever the precarious condition of childhood's inhabitants, the media pays atten- 1. I wish to acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Margaret Stieg and Dr. Joan Atkinson in the preparation of this article. 2. University of Wisconsin, School of Library and Information Studies, Madison, Wiscon- sin 53706. [Libraiy Quarterly, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 30-591 0 1994 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/94/6401-0003$01.00 30
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 31 tion to the literature of childhood, the juvenile works that function as innocent reading for varied-aged consumers and as fantastic landscapes in a more prosaic age. To understand the boom of the contemporary children's book market is to enter into the spirit of the nineteenth cen- tury. This was their prime, formative era. Children's books, particularly from the late Victorian period, look familiar to us today. Instead of the plain fare of instruction, books for the young appealed to adult as well as childish fancies. Picture books were celebrated as works of art and enjoyed a large following. From the largesse of the literati with its tradition of authoring and editing children's books, to the speculative market of sensational fiction, chil- dren's books shared a public literary culture of young and old. The popularity of children's literature can be determined not only by the diversity of books produced but also by the nature of the productions and the manner in which they were presented. Much of this information can be obtained from a study of what the critics said. The Victorian periodical press both reflected and constructed the re- sponse of the public to a literature of childhood. Literary journalists reviewed children's books in response to a heightened interest in chil- dren's reading and to a concomitant rise in the juvenile book market. Journals and magazines included essays on children's literature in its relationship to education, book arts, and the marketplace. These reviews and commentary constituted the criteria by which children's books were interpreted and given value in the late Victorian period. The dialectic between the author and the reading public is the concern of reception theory, a branch of reader-response criticism. How were children's books received in the formative period of the late nineteenth century? What contributions did the critics make in shaping the cultural discourse over children's books? How does this reception compare to the climate that shapes contemporary book pub- lishing? To answer these questions, we must turn to the cultural gate- keepers of the age-the periodical reviewers-to see how they per- ceived and promoted children's books. Seventy-five periodicals, both British and American, were examined for a twenty-year period to un- derstand these critical years of the golden age of children's literature.3 The primary research question was to what extent late Victorian criti- cism reflected and constructed a certain climate that encouraged the growth and development of what has become modern children's litera- ture. A theoretical approach known as "reception theory" provides the foundation for a study of historical readership.4 3. See Appendix table Al for a list of periodicals. 4. For a fuller treatment of this subject, see reference [1].
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Reception Theory Reception theory is a modern approach to literary history that examines the ways in which literary works are received by readers. The examina- tion of "reception" began in the 1950s in the fields of jurisprudence, theology, and philosophy. The application of reception theory to liter- ary studies developed in the late 1960s as a way to relate the three elements of aesthetic communication: author, work, and recipient (or reader, critic, and audience). The approach is a reaction to the limita- tions of intrinsic literary study, often known as "New Criticism," in which a literary work is considered complete unto itself, autonomous and apart from the reader. Reception theory is related to other rhetorical studies, such as reader- response criticism. They have in common an interest in the relationship between the literary text and its reader, between what is being communi- cated and how it is received. Each reader-oriented approach acknowl- edges that literary works do not exist within a vacuum but have meaning from their interaction with readers. Reception study is distinguished by its greater concern with historical changes affecting the reading public than with the solitary reader. Literary meaning is determined over time, by a series of readings constituting its history of influence. The history of reception includes those literary and sociological factors that shape individual responses in a given time and place. The context of reception is defined in material and ideological terms, in aesthetic terms, or in terms of evaluative interpretive communities that mediate between the literary product and audience. "Horizons of expectations" is the foundation of reception theory, the criterion by which readers judge literary texts in any given period. The horizons consist of the readers' current knowledge and assumptions about literature, both intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic horizons reflect literary experience with genres, conventions, and themes against which a work is read and evaluated. Extrinsic horizons reflect the social and political conditions and norms in the larger society. The intrinsic and extrinsic horizons are interdependent. A literary text has a particular historical audience that responds to the work in a dialectical relationship of question and answer. A text has a particular meaning for its time by the way it answers the fundamental questions of its age. The questions and answers embedded in a literary work in a particular historical moment can only be understood by a later age through reconstructing the horizons of expectations of that time. Literary works ask and answer questions, the substance of which reveals how the readers of that day viewed and understood the work. To formulate an account of the reception of children's books in the
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 33 1880s and 1890s, it is necessary to turn to the documentary evidence of the reviews and commentary of contemporary readers. Seventy-five periodicals were selected as the leading reviewing journals of the day, as determined through Poole's Index, Nineteenth-Century Readers' Guide, and Wellesley Index. Of this number, forty-six periodicals, or 61 percent, did some reviewing of juvenile literature. On the inclusion of commen- tary on children's literature, fifty periodicals, or 67 percent, were repre- sented. Some periodicals that did not review children's books included articles about issues related to children's reading, notable children's book authors, or classic children's books of an earlier era. The high percentage of periodicals covering children's books is significant consid- ering that most were literary reviews or magazines oriented to a general adult readership. As this late Victorian period was prior to the establish- ment of professional journals in the field, these periodicals represent the nature and extent of cultural discourse concerning children and their literature. The following horizons are constructed by me and arrived at induc- tively through a consideration of contemporary accounts. The horizons were articulated in the process of determining the context for the recep- tion of one particular children's book author and illustrator, Kate Greenaway (1846-1901). In the process of establishing her critical reception, I became familiar with general patterns of children's book reviewing during the 1880s-1890s in England and America. Kate Greenaway's contemporary reception could be examined only by under- standing the larger cultural context of her day: the historical situation of which both the readers and the works were a part. Victorian Horizons of Expectations The horizons of expectations with respect to children's literature in the 1880s and 1890s constituted the context in which juvenile books were received. The literary discourse of the period could be described as including the following spectrum of positions: (1) treatment of chil- dren's books as a commodity; (2) elevation of children's books as works of art; (3) emphasis on illustration and pictorial effects in literature; (4) lack of rigid demarcation between adult and children's literature; (5) a growing gender division; (6) diversification of the didactic tradi- tion; (7) continuing debate on fantasy and realism; (8) romantic idealiza- tion of childhood and its literature; (9) attention to the historiography of children's literature; and (10) anxiety about the changing character of children's literature. These characteristics of the literary climate describe the complex and
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY often conflicting critical reception of children's books in the late Victo- rian period. While these issues have been present to some extent since the advent of children's book publishing in the mid-eighteenth century, they converged to create a unique climate for the reception of children's books in England and America in the late nineteenth century. Treatment of Children's Books as a Commodity Victorian children's books were perceived as commodities, in the sense of being used as prizes or rewards, gift books, and toy books. Books as prizes had a long tradition in juvenile publishing. They were originally designed to impart moral guidelines, to reinforce exemplary behavior, and to caution against evils of intemperance or profanity. The Religious Tract Society, with evangelical leanings, and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, with a broader base, were two pioneer publishers in the field whose influence continued throughout the century. By the 1870s, prize books were more secular in content and more attractive in appearance. Many of the mainstream publishers, such as Cassell, Routledge, Ward Lock, Nelson, and Nisbet, developed categories of reward series. Reviewers rarely discussed prize books as such, but cov- ered the leading publishers; the Times regularly reviewed new works of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, noting that they ex- celled in story books with a wide range of tone and subject matter [2, p. 8]. The visibility of prize books in the marketplace was most evident in periodical advertisements: the Religious Tract Society announced its list in the Spectator (1879) as "Christmas Presents and School Prizes"; Mudie's Circulating Library headlined an extensive list as "Christmas Presents and Prizes" [3, pp. 1549, 1555]. While this "prize book" market was more institutional, geared to Sun- day schools and other educational purposes, most of the children's book trade was centered on the home. The multitude of periodicals, the pro- motion of books as designed for family reading, and the timeliness and publishing zeal in late autumn months for the holiday gift market all pointed to the significance of the family as a responsive market for children's book publishing. The appearance of children's books at the Christmas season promoted the association of juvenile books with illustrated holiday books or annu- als. Illustrated gift books, often called "keepsakes," "forget-me-nots," or "friendship's offering," were produced from the beginning of the nineteenth century. They were essentially booklets of verse, by whatever famous personage could be cited as a contributor, and illustrated with steel engravings. Seasonal themes were common. The gift books were meant to be ornamental, in the style of our coffee-table books today, something more to adorn a room rather than to be read.
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 35 The annuals began to be fashioned into illustrated Christmas stories by popular authors. It was to this tradition that the public received Charles Dickens's A Christmas Carol (1843) and William Thackeray's The Rose and the Ring (1855). This fashion died out, too, after which the illustrated magazines revived the "annual" tradition in their special Christmas numbers. In the late 1860s holiday gift books, illustrating a favorite poem or other literary masterpiece, began to appear on the shelves at Christmas time. Publishers vied with each other as the demand for the books grew. While only a few publishers were associated with the Christmas book trade at mid-century, by 1880, as the Dial noticed, the leading publishers, both English and American, were competing and employing "much of the finest literary, artistic, and inventive talent that clusters around the publishing craft" [4, p. 159]. Much of this atten- tion was directed to a young audience. The Graphic (1882) noted a marked change in the character of Christmas literature: "Formerly the season produced a host of handsome and elaborately illustrated 'draw- ing-room' volumes; now such works are few and far between, and pub- lishers' energies seem concentrated on the childish public" [5, p. 494]. The concentration of children's book publishing at the Christmas sea- son promoted the notion of the book as commodity. The Times (1883) began one of their Christmas book surveys by connecting the "English manner of celebrating Christmas" and "the development of popular English art." The fashion for exchanging gifts promoted the publishing of books, especially with "the growing taste for reading" and "the pub- lishers of many classes" eager to provide competition [6, p. 4]. Juvenile books regularly appeared approximately two months before Christmas. Most publishers featured children's books only at this season, a practice that elicited commentary. The Graphic considered "how little juvenile literature is published at any other time" [7, p. 418]. The Nation noted in 1879, "Every holiday season brings a fresh assortment of stories for the young which, as being new, recommend themselves as gifts and do their share in the cultivation of juvenile ethics" [8, p. 408]. In 1880 the Saturday Review commented that the quantity is much more remark- able than the quality: "A flock of brilliant cloth covers, a crowd of wood- cuts, is the general impression left on the weary eye and brain" [9, p. 655]; in 1882 the journal observed that Christmas books come out ear- lier all the time, now appearing by late September [10, p. 711]; and in 1886 Christmas picture books were "sufficiently numerous to engage the whole of the fabulous family of the old lady that lived in a shoe" [11, p. 733]. The Illustrated London News (1882) defined the gift book genre as consisting of handsome editions of popular classics, illustrated with pictorial designs; new flights of fancy, such as narrative poems or fairy tales, also furnished with graphic illustration; and children's books,
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nursery tales, rhymes, or "new ones specially composed for the beloved infant race of this present time" [12, p. 454]. The Graphic stated in 1892 that the juvenile literature of the year was crowded into a few weeks, "a custom too deeply rooted for change" [13, p. 534]. This custom, according to the Bookman (1896), impeded literary criticism, since the books appeared as a great bulk, impossible to characterize except in a cursory manner [14, p. 385]. Victorian children's books developed in part from the gift book tradi- tion. John Newbery's pioneer works in the mid-eighteenth century were gift books, containing miscellaneous verse, pictures, and marketing ploys. A Little Pretty Pocket-Book (1744) included toys as rewards and gimmicks of promotion: balls for boys, pincushions for girls. Nine- teenth-century children's books perpetuated these associations with the designation of "toy books." Largely a publisher's invention, the term was used to describe contemporary picture books, often issued in series, which depended for their impact on the use of color. The emphasis was indeed on color, not text, which was often slighted, until Edmund Evans transformed the genre with high quality artistic books: the works of Walter Crane, Randolph Caldecott, and Kate Greenaway. By 1895, the Dial, noting the proliferation of Christmas books for children, commented that their imaginative composition could "supply a modern school of fiction" but was instead contained in fifty or so volumes of "impractical and impossible extravagances" [15, p. 339]. To Dial, these books potentially might stimulate the heroism and genius of the future, but, more practically, their sheer volume and excess might just as readily "crush them" [15]. Elevation of Children's Books as Works of Art Children's books were transformed during this period from utilitarian fare to objects of art. The Dial (1881) admired the beautiful volumes, resplendent in gilt covers and exquisite illustrations, heaped on the booksellers' shelves, and recalled, in contrast, the books of the writer's own childhood, "plain and clumsy to ugliness in their exterior" [16, p. 182]. The Art Journal (1881) noted, too, the startling difference between the toy books of twenty years ago and those of the present. The earlier books were described as "primitive" and "clumsy" in conception and craftsmanship, characterized by crude lines and harsh colors, devoid of beauty. Acknowledging Randolph Caldecott's influence, the journal stated, "Art for the nursery has become Art indeed" [17, p. 212]. The Magazine of Art (1882) chronicled the rise of illustration in children's books, from its infancy in the mid-eighteenth century when the expecta- tions were low; now the standards were high in the use of paper, type, and, especially, color printing, which gave the books the status to be considered as works of art [18, p. 129].
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 37 Gift books and toy books attained artistic status through technical as well as aesthetic changes. The revival of etching and invention of photo mechanical methods of reproduction provided a medium for a new school of illustrators. The success of children's magazines stimulated greater attention to book arts. The competition for subscriptions and quality stories and art work raised the standards in general for children's literature. The decade of the 1880s was attuned to art reform. "Aestheticism" was the name given to the heightened emphasis on art principles in domestic manufacturing, including furniture, ceramics, textiles, wall- papers, and books, an emphasis that began in mid-nineteenth-century England. Its most visible impact was on architecture, where it was known as the "Queen Anne style," an eclectic mix of red brick, white-painted sash windows, and Dutch gables. This progressive ideal of style led to a greater interest in aesthetics for children. The aesthetic movement in illustration was heralded by books written for children, with adults in mind, particularly the work of Walter Crane, Randolph Caldecott, and Kate Greenaway. Contemporary reviewers were aware of the phenomenon. Grant Al- len in the Fortnightly Review (1879) related the work of Robert Louis Stevenson, Walter Crane, and Randolph Caldecott to "the many prod- ucts of the Queen Anne revival," which he characterized as a reaction to "the formless solidity of the age wherein we live" [19, p. 154]. He astutely observed that literary revivals tended to look back to an ideal- ized world while incorporating touches of the modern spirit as well [19, p. 154]. The Critic (1881) praised the number of excellent toy books on the market, which should help children learn at an early age to distinguish good art from bad [20, p. 307]. The Graphic (1881) surmised that "children of the nineteenth century ought to grow up with well- cultured artistic tastes if they profit by the daintily illustrated books provided for their delectation" [21, p. 471]. The Dial (1881) observed that books best show the influence of "art-culture" in America [16, p. 180]. Children's books were touted as a measure of the progress of the American people in applying art to decorative purposes and to the techniques of art. A skillful use of color-"the last and most sacred element of beauty"-was considered essential. Holiday books for chil- dren revealed the extent of this "genuine feeling for the beautiful and a correct interpretation of its laws and possible interpretations" [16]. This description, which could function in itself as a contemporary defi- nition of "aestheticism," suggests how children's books related to the extension of the movement. A children's book could hope for no higher praise than the word "artistic." Publishers even advertised their books as such. An advertise- ment by E. P. Dutton in the Critic (1884) was entitled "Artistic Children's
38 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Books" and included promotional blurbs that cited one book as a model for students in water-color drawing and another as "the most charming specimen of really artistic children's books that we have met for a long time" [22, p. xi]. By the late 1870s, children's books stood at the fore- front of fashion, reflecting contemporary artistic motifs and attracting a sizable, sophisticated market. While the aesthetic movement peaked in the 1860s-1870s, its influ- ence lingered in the status accorded children's books as art. In 1882 the Graphic noted that aestheticism was beginning to wane, but not in children's books, where it was more influential than ever. The reviewer mentioned the familiar aesthetic themes still so prominent in juvenile books: "fancies of olden times, soft refined colouring, and humour sug- gested rather than strongly expressed" [23, p. 559]. In 1900, the Dial wrote about Walter Crane's picture books: "The pictures are sufficiently decorative to be used on the nursery walls by lovers of life and beauty" [24, p. 507]. Aesthetic principles were embodied in the arts and crafts movement, with its emphasis on hand craftsmanship and what the En- glish artist William Morris called "the book beautiful." Emphasis on Illustration and Pictorial Effects in Literature In the Victorian period, art became increasingly important not only in illustrating the text but also in influencing literary discourse. As a visual art, illustration was able to extend the concerns of the journalist and the novelist. In its opening issue in 1842, the Illustrated London News declared that art had become the bride of literature. In the serial novels of Dickens, the illustrations and pictorial narrative worked as one. A public receptive to art was instrumental in the response to illustrated children's books. The use of illustration in both children's and adult literature-picture books, periodicals, and novels-helped to educate the expectations of the public and stimulate a close relationship between books for young and old. The popularization of visual elaboration coincided with technical progress in printing for a mass audience. The development of wood engraving was instrumental in creating a popular audience for illustra- tion. Wood engraving was a traditional woodcut technique dating back to the thirteenth century. This technique cuts away the parts of a design that are to be white and leaves the black parts in relief. Both text and illustration can be printed together. Wood engraving had been devel- oping steadily since the mastery of the craft by Thomas Bewick (1753- 1828). Bewick perfected the process that was used extensively through- out the nineteenth century, which necessitated hardwood blocks and tools of metal engraving. He demonstrated the effect of light and shade by lowering parts of the block to print faintly and to create delicate
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 39 designs by using the close-grained end of boxwood. Bewick's techniques were adapted by news periodicals, which found the unity of the page conducive for mass production. From the 1840s illustrations played a role in periodicals, but by the 1860s visual matter was prominent. Wood engraving was suitable to the large print runs of popularjournalism. The development of a workable process of picture reproduction stimulated creativity and the emergence of artists. Professionally trained artists were engaged to illustrate appeal- ing images of Victorian life to accompany serialized fiction, poetry, travel literature, and news stories. Illustration became a staple of popu- lar journalism. The receptivity of the public to these images increased the use of wood engraving to produce publications in greater abundance and economy. The number of new publishers of books and periodicals grew rapidly, as did the reputations of these artists, who enjoyed an unprecedented public following and influence. Technical innovations changed the direction of printing by the mid- 1860s. Thomas Bolton developed a technique of transferring a photo- graphed image of a drawing to a wooden block, which enabled the engraver to work on the surface and to preserve the original drawing. George Baxter pioneered a process of using aquatinting to produce a design in color; the technique was further refined by J. M. Kronheim to produce similar effects at a lower cost. Color printing by wood en- graving was perfected in the work of Edmund Evans, a printer in direct lineage to Bewick. Evans, apprenticed to Ebenezer Landells, a pupil of Bewick, developed a mastery in color printing from wood blocks and worked closely with his artists-Walter Crane, Randolph Caldecott, and Kate Greenaway-in utilizing the possibilities and limitations of the me- dium. Evans demonstrated that it was possible to produce inexpensive illustrated books of fine color and taste. Artistic styles and technical methods were further expanded toward the end of the century by oriental influence and the revival of interest in early illustration. The illustrator, often collaborating with the author, became more interested in interpreting the text than in decorating the page. As Walter Crane said, "The ornamental sense ... had everywhere declined; pictorial qualities, fineness of line, and delicacy of tone, were sought after almost exclusively" [25, p. 146]. Much of the attention for- merly devoted to the title page was now directed to the book's cover. The emphasis on the visual, on the physical attractiveness of a book, created a stimulating book environment. Art was so prominent in literature that a writer in the Critic (1883) stated, "The spirit of the times takes much more kindly to the art of the painter than to that of verse-making" [26, p. 263]. The prevalence of illustration accompanying text in periodicals and novels affected the
40 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY expectations of the public for the reading experience. The impact was on the serialization process as well as on the framework of illustrated texts. In suggesting character, advancing plot, stating dialogue, and in- fusing moral significance, the illustrator's creativity shared the novelist's dramatic quality. The inherent rivalry was exacerbated by a practice of matching text to preexisting pictures. The traditional role of text and illustration was reversed as well in the practice of gift books; often the illustrations were completed first, with verse then written to complement the pictures. Reviewers frequently noted the dominance of illustration in contem- porary literature. To the Critic (1882), "A savage dropped into a modern bookstore would undoubtedly suppose literature to be something to look at; something like Wordsworth's Nature, with 'no charm unbor- rowed from the eye"' [27, p. 327]. The Literaiy World (1881) was struck by the proliferation of illustration, once so diffuse, which was now di- rected toward two distinct lines: "the pictorial poem and the children's quarto" [28, p. 327]. The Dial (1880) noted the stock of holiday juvenile books, most of which were illustrated, and commented as an aside, "A holiday book without pictures is like a Christmas pudding without plums" [4, p. 163]. To Walter Crane, children's book illustration was the only imaginative outlet available for the creative artist who rebelled against "the despotism of facts" [25, p. 158]. Heightened attention to art was perceived as a threat to the future of literature. An 1880 essay in Lippincott's, "Our Monthly Gossip: Cheap Books," attributed a decline in quality literature to the ascendancy of aestheticism. The author noted, "Literature is out of fashion, and Art is having its day" [29, p. 641]. Art was defined not in the abstract but in the commercial sense-"pocket-art." The public was perceived as seeking not the distinguished literary works of the past but handbooks to art and guides to decoration and ornamentation. In such a cultural climate, books lessened in value as well as cost. All that mattered was art and adornment. The writer was concerned that women's advancement would be jeopardized by a preoccupation with aesthetic touches in artis- tic needlework and china painting, at the expense of higher goals of intellectual merit [29, pp. 641-42]. Lack of Rigid Demarcation between Adult and Children's Literature Children's books were read frequently by adults in the nineteenth cen- tury. Six of the ten best-sellers in the United States between 1875 and 1895 were children's books: Heidi, Treasure Island, A Child's Garden of Verses, Huckleberry Finn, Little Lord Fauntleroy, and King Solomon's Mines. The generation after 1880 was the era of Robert Louis Stevenson, How- ard Pyle, L. Frank Baum, Beatrix Potter, and Laura Richards. Richards's
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 41 poetry was often featured in the Ladies Home Journal, suitably illustrated by Kate Greenaway. The genre of adventure fiction appealed to both children and adults, who made popular such works as Ben Hur, Rudyard Kipling's fables, and the scientific fantasies of Jules Verne as well as the magical creatures of Palmer Cox's The Brownies. This dual readership was recognized in the reviews. The Atlantic Monthly in 1894 described the phenomenon as "not juvenile literature but books for the big about the little" [30, p. 853]. The Times (1889) found that "some of the stories for younger children are far more amus- ing reading to our minds than nineteen-twentieths of the three-volume novels" [31, p. 13]. The Art Journal (1881) distinguished between two classes of children's books: those actually written for children and those catering to "the pleasure of grown-up as well as infantile minds" and noted the continuing trend of publishing high-class works "nominally intended for the little ones, but also catering to the grown-up folks" [32, pp. 380, 408]. Reviewers frequently made reference to books "de- lighting all children between the ages of six and sixty," or "pleasing the old as well as the young." Younger children and adults shared picture books. Older children read books whose subject matter attracted a broad popular audience. Some examples included Charles Dickens's novels, G. A. Henty's imperi- alistic adventures, James Fenimore Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales, Har- riet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin, Louisa May Alcott's Little Women, Mark Twain's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, and Frances Hodgson Burnett's Little Lord Fauntleroy, which was described in Murray's Magazine (1887) as "one which appeals equally to the old-young reader and the young-old reader" [33, p. 288]. The Pall Mall Gazette conducted a poll in July 1898 to determine the best books for a ten-year-old. As a summary of children's leisure read- ing, it was instructive, suggesting the longevity of many of the books that children read in the late nineteenth century. Most popular was Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, followed by two perennial favorites, the fairy tales of the Grimms and of Andersen. Robin-son Crusoe and Little Lord Fauntleroy followed, with The Water Babies (sixth), The Heroes (sev- enth), The Jungle Book (eighth), and Pilgrim's Progress (ninth). Next came The Arabian Nights, then Through the Looking Glass, the books of Alcott, Ivanhoe, and Masterman Ready. Ranked fifteenth were the fairy tale an- thologies of Andrew Lang, and the final favorites were the books of Mrs. Molesworth and G. A. Henty. Some critics acknowledged the distinction between books for and books about children. The ArtJournal (1883), recounting the history of children's books, noted that Alice in Wonderland appealed to both adults and children, and its enormous popularity and commercial success en-
42 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY couraged authors to write for both; the drawback to this approach, of course, was that in trying to please both, an author would please neither [34, p. 21]. Blackwood's (1896) stated that books that were "avowedly designed both for children and for grown-up people are apt to please neither" [35, p. 389]. Mrs. E. M. Field's The Child and His Book (1891) noted that many recent books for children had not been stories for children, but stories about children, of greater interest to grown people than to the young. While her book surveyed older traditions in chil- dren's literature, her comments on the contemporary scene showed some concern for the appropriateness of the dual audience. To Field, contemporary artists were, if anything, "too good." As she said, "The nursery picture-book has a curious tendency to find its way to the draw- ing-room table and to the smoking-room lounge, even perhaps to the serious study shelf. And uncles and aunts who buy these charming pro- ductions 'for the children' are frequently discovered to be themselves gloating over them in a corner" [36, p. 314]. While admiring the beauty of these books, she found some of the older illustrators, such as Bewick, to be superior in their directness and simplicity [36, p. 314]. Horace E. Scudder, the Atlantic Monthly editor, wrote Childhood in Literature and Art in 1895, which distinguished between books in which the child merely furnished the subject matter and those that were written to be read by the children themselves [37]. The American Review of Reviews noted this distinction, adding that many children's books were sources of entertain- ment to grown-up people and that no rigid classification should be made [38, p. 698]. By the end of the century, there were hints of coming changes. Com- pared to the prime period of the golden age of children's book publish- ing, fewer distinguished prose writers showed an interest in writing for children. The Dial (1901) noticed this tendency and expressed concern for the adverse effects on children's literature. Recalling that the masters of English fiction a generation ago had not found children's books to be beneath them, the reviewer detected "a great gulf" between chil- dren's book authors, who "have little or no reputation in the broader paths of literature" and those who wrote for adult audiences [39, p. 449]. A Growing Gender Division The decades of the 1880s and 1890s displayed a growing consciousness of gender and a more rigid classification of children's books. Reflecting the broader discourse on gender roles, children's books during this pe- riod often dealt with themes of the "test of manhood" or "true woman- hood." While books for the youngest readers tended to be more gender- inclusive, those for older children divided largely into adventure fiction
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 43 for boys and domestic chronicles for girls. Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island and Louisa May Alcott's Little Women stood as quintessen- tial examples. Historians agree that gender division in children's books became a marked trend in the 1860s, the "After-Alice" boom period of publish- ing. Edward Salmon, a prominent author and authority on children's books in the 1880s and 1890s, addressed the subject in various periodi- cals and in a collection of essays, Juvenile Literature as It Is (1888). In "What Girls Read," appearing in the Nineteenth Century (1886), Salmon was critical of the writing for girls, not in quality but in subject matter, which lacked the dynamism of boys' books. Domestic dramas, described as "goody-goody," appeared lackluster after the hairbreadth escape of boys' fiction. Girls' books existed as a transition to adult reading and to prepare young women for their social roles ahead. Well-known female authors were discussed, with Alcott the most esteemed. A poll of girls' and boys' reading, conducted by Charles Welsh, indicated a strong pref- erence among both sexes for the works of Charles Dickens and Sir Walter Scott, and little reference to girls' fiction. While Salmon ques- tioned the validity of the survey, he was struck by the omission and suggested that authors reconsider before producing "another story on the usual lines" [40]. Reviewers began in earnest to differentiate between boys' and girls' books in the 1890s. Current Literature (1899) defined the gender differ- ences by suggesting that morals should be introduced indirectly into stories, so that little boys would intuitively recognize the requisite quali- ties behind the heroes of adventure fiction, and little girls would be stirred in their feminine stories with "sweetness and innocence in charm- ing profusion" [41, p. 206]. While earlier columns grouped fiction for boys and girls in composite columns labeled "Juveniles," separate divi- sions now appeared. The Review of Reviews, a periodical originating in 1890 to reprint work from other periodicals, distinguished between them in their coverage of "Gift Literature." The Academy, which had long reviewed children's books and had recently begun a Christmas book supplement, announced in 1900 that "children's books" had be- come too large a designation and that distinction would now be made between "Picture Books," "Story Books," and "Books for Boys and Girls" [42, P. 558]. From the 1880s, the Times devoted separate review essays to boys' and girls' literature. Of all the reviewing outlets, the Times was the most critical of popular fiction for the young, particularly books written espe- cially for girls. One reviewer in 1885 admitted an unsympathetic re- sponse to books written for girls and added complaints about boys' books being monotonous in plot and motive. However, even in the stal-
44 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY est adventure story for boys, there would be some excitement, which contrasted sharply with girls' fiction: "However often the hero may be blown up or shot down... although we know he has more lives than any cat, and are assured that he will be returned to his home and parents, nevertheless there is always the exciting question as to how to scrape through each particular peril; while feminine authors writing for their sex seldom dare or care to stir the pulses, except in a quietly sentimental fashion" [43, p. 13]. Commenting in 1886 on girls' fiction, the Times suggested that publishers would be more successful "if they occasionally gave a clever authoress her head, remembering that girls, as well as boys, delight in life and action" [44, p. 13]. The Dial (1899) noted differ- ences in the quantity of books written for boys and for girls. The re- viewer found it curious that fiction for adults was largely peopled with female characters, while fiction for youth was decidedly slanted toward boys' interests [45, p. 432]. A Diversification of the Didactic Tradition The Victorian age as a whole was preoccupied by moral concerns. As one contemporary essayist wrote in the Bookman (1897), Victorian lit- erature was "a literature of the pulpit-always self-conscious, always 'moral"' [46, p. 58]. Children's literature has been dominated by the didactic tradition from its beginnings: the expectation that books for the young must in some way inform and instruct. The late Victorian period has been distinguished in the literature for its departure from the strictures of didacticism. An essay in Saturday Review (1866) marked this trend in the growing rise of fiction for the young. The writer noted the scarcity of books available earlier in the century, citing a brief canon of acceptable works: books by authors Maria Edgeworth, Sarah Trim- mer, Anna Barbauld, Lucy Aiken, and Thomas Day; a few periodicals and an occasional annual; and, in more progressive homes, classics like Gulliver's Travels, Arabian Nights, Don Quixote, Robinson Crusoe, Tales from Shakespeare, Tales of the Genii, and Rasselas. Now all had changed, as children's books reflected "the development of a theory of fiction- making for the young at which our own worthy fathers and mothers would have stood amazed, if not absolutely aghast" [47, p. 238]. The writer marveled at the abundance of juvenile stories available, in a vari- ety of illustrations and prices. Fiction was now considered appropriate family reading. The author estimated that for every one book of fiction read by the young earlier in the century, fifty fictional works were now consumed [47, p. 238]. A few years later, an 1870 Graphic vividly described the developments in this growing genre. Using the image of the nursery rhyme of Jack Horner and his Christmas pies, the reviewer remembered his own child-
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 45 hood reading, where he felt lucky to find "one plum of incident or adventure amidst the solid mass of suet of instruction and the flour of moral precepts." Contemporary children were now able to have their instruction by itself and their amusement by itself, "unspoiled by any dread of being trapped into 'lessons' in the midst of 'play"' [48, p. 590]. While it has been a commonplace to view the period of the mid- 1860s through the turn of the century as the golden age of imaginative litera- ture, there was no real departure from didactic aims in children's books. Indeed, the 1866 Saturday Review noted the appropriation of fiction by religious authors, whereby "the ingenuous youth of today are to be seduced into the paths of virtue" [47]. Most children's books throughout the period exhibited pronounced moral or instructive themes, although there were changes in tone. Exemplary behavior could shape destiny, given the right amount of persistence. One evidence of the survival of didacticism in the late Victorian pe- riod was the continued publication of many of the older didactic classics. Books by Sarah Trimmer, Mary Sherwood, and Thomas Day appeared in revised editions, with more engaging illustrations and abridged texts. New editions of Mrs. Trimmer's Fabulous Histories (1786) were reprinted under the more whimsical original subtitle, The History of the Robins, and were published well into the twentieth century. Mrs. Sherwood's The Fairchild Family (three parts, 1817-47) was reprinted in one-volume edi- tions, with some textual changes. Some of the more extreme religious exhortations were deleted as well as the notorious incident in the book when the children are escorted to a gibbet to see the decaying remains that ensued from quarrelsome behavior. Thomas Day's Sandford and Merton (three parts, 1783-89) was reprinted many times, translated into French, and appeared in a greatly condensed chapbook edition. The persistence of instructional works was stimulated by periodical essays and reviews that revived the childhood classics. In the New Review and reprinted in the Eclectic Magazine, popular author F. Anstey wrote a long tribute to The Fairchild Family, a work of "didactic piety" and "portentous instructiveness" that has maintained its popularity and ap- peal for "even the most secular-minded child" [49, p. 698]. An Academy editorial of 1905 touted the older works for their clarity of vision and directness in discipline, as opposed to "the introspective literature of- fered to the youth of our day" [50, p. 925]. Blackwood's, surveying the contemporary landscape of children's literature in 1896, commented that "the collapse of baldly and blatantly didactic literature which took place a quarter of a century ago has not been an unmixed blessing" [35, p. 387]. Tracing the evolution of a new tone in children's literature, the Blackwood's reviewer concluded that children now had the good fortune of possessing excellent entertainment plus "the pick of the di-
46 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY dactic literature, which has lost all its sting" [35, p. 387]. The writer praised the quality of the old didactic tales, which children could still enjoy, especially since they would not take them seriously but would "revel in their archaic oddity" [35, p. 387]. Biographical essays appeared on the classic Georgian children's authors, including Hannah More, Ma- ria Edgeworth, Anna Barbauld, and Lucy Aiken. Most discussions of children's books in periodicals of the day included references to didactic intentions. The Outlook included a long essay, "Literature for Children" (1883), which was excerpted in the Critic, in which the author stated that "every story should have an aim or lesson," the truth of which would be revealed not by explicit authorial observa- tion but by narrative development [51, p. 243]. Current Literature (1900) expressed a similar aim: "Let them have the joy of their childhood in the little time while they may, and make them moral by example rather than by precept-at least, such precepts as are found in books avowedly didactic" [52, p. 246]. But adults were counseled to be indirect in their religious exhortation, to avoid, in the words of the Critic (1884), "harp- ing on the golden strings" [53, p. 267]. Discourse on children's books was part of the contemporary develop- ments in literacy and education. In England, the passage of the Foster Elementary Education Act in 1870 promoted an awareness of educa- tional needs and created a growing market for the publishers. For the first time the government made provisions to utilize the power of "the mighty engine of literature," in Matthew Arnold's words. By 1880 Par- liament established compulsory education laws for all English children under twelve. The advent of universal education demonstrated the ne- cessity of revising the conventional ideas of moral and social behavior, which had been long established within a settled middle-class society. Educational aims became so dominant that one writer in the Quarterly Review (1886) warned against excluding amusement and reminded readers that it is through the imagination that a child's interest is aroused, without which our "educational labours will be worthless" [54, p. 512]. In America, expressions of faith in the social and individual benefits of education influenced the publishing of children's books. The Critic commented in 1887 that educational works were beginning to over- whelm the market. The writer described the field as a table to which the choicest dishes were brought, where "didactic blackbirds vociferat- ing the most useful information are packed, as it were, in innumerable tempting pies" [55, p. 285]. Current Literature (1888) viewed the growing list of distinguished writers creating books for children as a landmark of American civilization-"this attention to the mental needs of the young" [56, p. 472]. Dial (1894) noted the phenomenon as well, re-
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 47 marking that "some of the best writers, alive to the importance of this field, are sharing in the production of books of information" [57, p. 339]. The didactic tradition was being redefined and reshaped into diverse formats. Earlier evangelical concerns were being replaced by a new sci- entism. Technical changes in Victorian printing made illustration a prominent feature of publishing for children. While most works in the earlier tradition of the moral tales were unillustrated, since illustration was perceived as incompatible with earnest content, contemporary in- structive works exploited the potential of the pictorial effect. Picture books offered a new format for conveying instructive messages. The growth of literacy and the expansion of the reading and visually ori- ented public shaped a diversified object and medium for children's books. Continuing Debate on Fantasy and Realism in Literature for Children The question of whether fact or fantasy was more appropriate reading for children has deep roots in the nineteenth century. The early reform- ists like Maria Edgeworth and Sarah Trimmer were concerned with educating children to live in a material world. They felt that children's imaginations might be damaged by contact with mystical worlds of en- chantment and mystery. Fairy tales were a subject of controversy. Fan- tasy in general had long been considered objectionable because it blurred truth and fiction and because it distracted children from the serious business of learning facts and moral lessons. The first objection, that fairy tales were untruthful, persisted in one form or another throughout the century, although it diminished over time. The second objection, that fairy tales were frivolous distractions from serious pur- suits, was particularly pronounced during the first third of the nine- teenth century, when children's books were invariably instructional in nature. The issue continued to be debated in the periodical press into the late nineteenth century. In 1895, a column in Punch, "Meeting of Fairy Folk," satirized an article from the Educational Times by a Mr. H. Hol- man, school inspector, who expressed his aversion to the fairy tales for their primitive, immoral nature. Punch then imagined the fairy tale characters meeting to protest their expulsion from the nursery and to defend their intrinsic utilitarian worth [58, p. 287]. Good Words also commented on Holman's views, citing his recently published book, Edu- cation: An Introduction to Its Principles and Their Psychological Foundations [59], which included a critique of fairy tales as "intellectual and moral atavism" (60, p. 214]. While Holman questioned fairy tales for their unrealistic depiction of experience beyond a child's world, William Can-
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ton's column in Good Words affirmed that very quality as a virtue, the anticipation of "a world of delight beyond the region of law." To Hol- man's claim that facts provided satisfying subject matter, Canton argued that the cost was too great: the acquisition of "a handful of crude facts" at the expense of "that divine sense of wonder, that spiritual vision, that imaginative sympathy" [60, p. 214]. Punch could well jest, and Good Words rejoin, particularly since es- teemed scholars like Andrew Lang shared their sentiment. As a promi- nent man of letters, Lang helped to popularize fairy tales and to impart an academic respectability to the field. Current Literature (1890) called Lang "unquestionably the foremost literary power in London at the present time" [61, p. 333]. His fairy book series, which began with the Blue Fairy Book in 1889 and ended with the Lilac Fairy Book in 1910, helped to shape a receptive public. To Lang, folktales were not the debased remains of higher literary myths but the very foundation of them. Lang's name was cited in an essay on fairy tales in All the Year Round (1893), in which the author urged the creation of such tales for adults, described as "the children who have grown up" [62, p. 199]. Fairy tales became fashionable fare in many literary magazines of the period. Even publications that normally did not cover children's litera- ture included pieces on fairy tales as reading for adults. In Pall Mall Magazine, Evelyn Sharp commemorated Hans Christian Andersen's publishing centennial and acknowledged that fairy tales led the children first and the grown-ups afterward [63, p. 132]. The Nineteenth Century included scholarly studies of fairy tales, notably "Cinderella" and "Puss in Boots" [64, 65]. The Gentleman's Magazine revealed a newly discovered fairy tale in verse by Charles Lamb [66]. The Edinburgh Review (1898) published an extensive history, "Fairy Tales as Literature," which was one of many that expressed what the author called "the gospel of child- hood's imagination" [67, p. 59]. Fairy tales were viewed as opening the door to the nursery for the adult, so that the eyes of the child lingered on in the adult as "eclipsed illusions" [67, p. 59]. Even when the adult learned the scientific basis of reality, there would still remain a link to "the imagination of grown years with the fairy-nurtured imaginations of the nursery" [67, p. 59]. America seemed more resistant to fairy tale enchantment. A reviewer in the Critic (1887) stated pragmatically, "Fairy-tales are hardly in fash- ion. If you doubt it, write one for the children's magazines, and see what becomes of it" [68, p. 661. An editorial in Current Literature (1900), in defense of fairy tales, expressed the main objection to be an exploita- tion of the supernatural "to an objectionable and harmful extreme" [69, p. 246]. An essayist in the journal Education (1900) argued that "well meaning but unimaginative teachers" substituted books of facts for
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 49 books of fancy, whereas fairy tales had a strong ethical element that expressed symbolically the truths of nature [70, p. 544]. What was pecu- liar to American children's literature was an emphasis on practicalities and self-reliance rather than imaginative play, exemplified in the popu- lar "Peter Parley" series. These instructional works on the subjects of history, natural science, geography, biography, and mythology featured a fictionalized narrator and generous use of illustrations. As late as 1897, the American Dial noted the prevalence of factual books of this type, which they attributed to "the worship of false gods" [71, p. 342]. The reviewer lamented the lack of imaginative content, citing barely half a dozen books that "give the imagination a chance to grow" [71, p. 342]. He decried the absence of fairy tales, which had a truth and authenticity that spoke to the needs of generations of children. The reviewer quoted a recent essay by Harry Thurston Peck, who called for a "Renaissance of the Natural, when they will no more be fed with formulas and made to learn so many improving things" [71, p. 342]. Dial noted that children were so satiated with formulas and facts, with "only practical common- places to digest," that the imagination was threatened by "death from inanition" [71]. Romantic Idealization of Childhood and Its Literature The 1880s and 1890s were an age of romanticism and escapism. The National Review (1891) repeated the description of the period as "the Age of Children" [72, p. 507]. Good Words (1904) described the nine- teenth century as "the Children's Century," noting the enhanced value placed on the child as the subject of reform movements as well as schol- arly studies and fictional narratives [73, p. 341]. Scribner's (1898) ex- plored the literary preoccupation with the child as "a second childhood in literature," in which writers looked back to a "golden age" for solace in uncertain times [74, p. 123]. Aestheticism had popularized childhood as a contrast to the excesses of modern technology, its commercial vulgarity and industrial blight. The aesthetes of the Queen Anne movement looked back to a greener time, an older time. Country life, not town life, was preferable. The old-fashioned became fashionable. The adjectives "delicate," "quaint," and "old-fashioned" were high praise, epitomizing a nostalgic romanti- cism of the past. The late Victorians envisioned childhood as preserving the innocent world that adults had lost. Childhood was considered a separate state of life, and the child became the focus of major imagina- tive and philosophical speculation-as well as commercial exploitation. Childhood for the Victorians became a symbol of mediation in a period of spiritual crisis. One poem in particular became the cultural text for this mediation-Wordsworth's "Ode: Intimations of Immortality from
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Recollections of Early Childhood" (1807). Throughout the nineteenth century, lines from this poem were summoned to evoke sentiment for reform as well as nostalgia. The child was viewed as one who was fresh from God and still remembered a heavenly home, while the aura sur- rounding childhood faded into the common light of adulthood. Writers indulged themselves in an imaginary return to the simplicity of child- hood. Scribner's (1896) noted the outpouring of "child literature," which seemed to be more about the child than for the child, more an expres- sion of a state of mind than a dramatic literature. Adults seemed to be receiving, in their words, "unalloyed enjoyment" out of this new "child literature," which was enjoying a kind of Elizabethan age [75, p. 519]. The Atlantic Monthly observed the trend as well. In a review of Frances Hodgson Burnett's The One I Knew Best of All, the reviewer noted the prevalent fashion of interpreting the life of the imaginative child in terms that produced not "juvenile literature," but "books for the big about the little" [76, p. 853]. The Critic (1901) noted in an article, "The Literary Cult of the Child," that the nineteenth century had indeed discovered childhood, that it had awakened to its "dramatic" and "pic- turesque" possibilities, and that the effect of the child-cult was not its moral effects but its artistic value [77, p. 167]. The image of the pastoral garden of childhood was pronounced for a whole framework of authors making up the golden age of children's literature: Charles Kingsley, Lewis Carroll, George MacDonald, Louisa Alcott, Richard Jeffries, Ken- neth Grahame, E. Nesbit, Beatrix Potter, J. M. Barrie, and A. A. Milne. Children were viewed as having a clear, even heightened, vision of the world, and by the end of the century, children and childhood became critical elements in the literary imagination. Such romanticism became sentimentalized in the popular culture. The Illustrated London News (1890) described the broad nostalgic appeal of childhood: "The pleasures of children supply the sweetest part of parents' pleasures; and to many a kindly heart, among good old maids and other childless persons, or the aged whose own sons and daughters have grown up to men and women, there is nothing so delightful, in the whole spectacle of life, as the innocent joys of the little people, without whose presence the world, indeed, would be horridly dull and dreary" [78, p. 739]. Periodicals reflected this iconization of the child in popular culture. In advertising, these images were used to peddle soap, insurance, silverware, or literature. Infants reading a book graced the 1880s cover of Tinsley's Magazine, a literary review of adult fiction. The child was extolled as "The New Hero" in an article by that title in the English Illustrated Magazine (1883), which was revived more than a decade later in the Revew of Reviews [79, 80]. Articles began to appear on the social welfare of children and on the reading responses of slum
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 51 children to popular books. An essay in Atlantic Monthly (1901), "The Child in the Library," began, "He was an only child and a motherless one," and then chronicled the great works of literature within the library that provided solace [81, p. 121]. Romanticism was also evident in the historical themes prevalent in American literature. The Dial (1899) related the contemporary trend of historical fiction-tales of colonial times-to romantic yearnings for a nation's childhood at a time of enormous growth into maturity. Leaving behind simpler times, the country looked back to its origins, "when the nation was still in swaddling clothes" [45]. Attention to the Historiography of Children's Literature The growing attention to classic books reflected the backward glance of romanticism. As the culture focused on the golden past, it looked to its own literature of childhood. The remembered books of the turn of the century were perceived as more wholesome, less corrupted by the marketplace. The Spectator (1899) examined "Modern Nursery Books" and concluded that contemporary authors would be well-advised to return to the old models [82]. Mrs. E. M. Field did just that in her history, The Child and His Book (1891), ending her discussion with books of the 1820s [36]. Art critic and editor Gleeson White wrote a seminal essay on the history of children's book illustration that consumed the whole issue of Studio (1897-98) [83]. Andrew Tuer compiled Pages and Pictures from Forgotten Children's Books (1898) and Stories from Old- Fashioned Children's Books (1898) and wrote the definitive work The His- tory of the Horn Book (1899) [84-86]. Facsimiles began to appear of classic books like Goody Two Shoes, with an introduction by Charles Welsh, noted bibliophile and biographer of John Newbery [87]. The first textbook anthology of "Classics for Children" appeared in 1885 by the press of Ginn, Heath & Company, to the rave reviews of the Dial [88, p. 51]. Essays on the history of children's literature appeared in a wide range of periodicals, some of which did not regularly cover children's books: the Atlantic Monthly published the review "The History of Children's Books" (1888) by Caroline Hewins [89], who was busily promoting old and new in the LibraryJournal; the Strand offered the surveys "Grandfa- ther's Picture-Books" (1892), "Favorite Books of Childhood" (1894), and "Some Old Children's Books" (1898) [90-92]; Eclectic Magazine re- printed an article that appeared in New Review, a tribute titled "An Old-Fashioned Children's Book: The History of the Fairchild Family" (1896) by popular author F. Anstey [49]; Blackwood's surveyed contem- porary literature in "On Some Books for Boys and Girls" (1896), con- cluding with a historical appraisal [35]; the New England Magazine of- fered Charles Welsh's "The Early History of Children's Books in New
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY England" (1899) [93]; Critic savored "Christmas Books of the Past" (1899), finding most contemporary holiday books "unwholesome and depressing" [941; Longman's explored "Some Eighteenth-Century Chil- dren's Books" (1901) [95]; and, in that same year, Edinburgh Review covered "Schoolroom Classics in Fiction" [96]. This interest in the ori- gins and development of children's books indicate a maturing field, an independent branch of literature, and a romantic longing for the past- for one's own childhood reading and the childhood of the genre. Anxiety about the Changing Character of Children's Literature To establish a canon of childhood literature became critical as its very foundations were considered threatened. The field was being glutted with cheap publications, products of the new rotary press, which made accessible what was popularly called "sensational fiction." The "penny dreadfuls," as they were known in England, or the "dime novels," as they were known in America, created great turmoil in the press. Many in the educational establishment felt threatened by such encroachment on the perceived purity of literature for the young. To Edward Salmon, "no element of sweetness and light" entered their dark forays into bloody revenge and base passions, improbably plotted and crudely exe- cuted [97]. Others nostalgically looked back to the simpler texts of their childhood and reminisced over the great classics so removed from what was now, in the words of the Dial (1888), "the large amount of trash which goes under the name of children's literature" [98, p. 211]. A few argued for greater tolerance of popular literature. One notable example was the essay "Sensational Literature," in All the Year Round (1892), in which the author examined the conventional wisdom about the adverse effects of cheap publications on culture and morality and refuted the charges in a strong defense of popular literature [99]. More common was the sentiment expressed by H. V. Weisse in "Read- ing for the Young" that cheap literature poisons the mind with its dubi- ous moral tone and unwholesome stimulus; Weisse even suggested that a life of crime might result from such literary consumption [100, 101]. The essayist in Outlook's "Reading for Children" (1901) pointed out that the matter of reading was of great importance and presented "so many perplexities" to parents eager to train the impressionable child [102, p. 866]. In 1886, the Quarterly Review, after surveying new editions of the great classics, called-"pleads" is their word-for a guide to children's books [54, p. 512]. The following decade would provide an abundance of such guides, in the way of polls, reading lists, essay reviews, and published books. One British newspaper, the Daily News, organized a survey of "the best one hundred books for children," the results of which appeared in the Academy and were reprinted in the Eclectic [103,
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 53 p. 802]. This cultural discourse over children's books articulated the formation of a "canon," a prescribed list of revered texts, which every age creates and redefines according to a complex historical process that involves aesthetic ideals, educational theories, psychological insight, and contemporary fashion. These horizons of expectations suggest a cultural consciousness of children and their growth toward "life and beauty," two hallowed words that were common to contemporary reviews and that, curiously enough, also described the themes of the great works of the golden age of children's literature. Conclusions As the nineteenth century neared its end, children's literature was shap- ing its identity as a separate genre and fledgling field of no small import. At the same time, children's literature was being shaped by the diverse expectations of its many publics. Children's books swelled the literary marketplace. They were second only to novels in book production, as the yearly notices in the Bookman indicated. The horizons of expecta- tions for Victorian children's books, as expressed through contemporary reviews and commentary, reinforced the notion of a literature taken seriously. The horizons suggest the deep significance for the Victorians of a literature of childhood. This analysis of the horizons of expectations has yielded the following conclusions: First, the treatment of children's books as a commodity revealed the profitability of children's books in the marketplace, the appropriation of the gift book genre, and the association of children's books as holiday fare and family reading. Second, the elevation of chil- dren's books as works of art indicated a dual audience for picture books, an aesthetic autonomy, and a perceived status as the apotheosis of art- culture. Third, the emphasis on illustration and pictorial effects in litera- ture lent a credibility to children's literature as a highly visual narrative form. Fourth, the lack of rigid demarcation between adult and chil- dren's literature created broad appeal for picture books and adventure fiction and encouraged the participation of the literati. Fifth, the grow- ing gender division led to further classification of children's books by gender and age categories, the expansion of the juvenile market, and the disappearance of a unified audience. Sixth, the diversification of the didactic tradition reflected the attention of the commercial trade to secular moralities and the move from narrow prescription and instruc- tion toward the satisfaction of a wider range of interests. Seventh, the continuing debate on fantasy and realism reflected the overt rejection of didacticism, the belated effects of romantic sensibilities, the conflicts
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of puritanism and scientism, and the adoption of the fairy tale as a fashionable Victorian genre. Eighth, the romantic idealization of child- hood and its literature invested the child with cult status, brought child- study to the forefront of scholarly and popular interests, and distin- guished between books for and about children. Ninth, attention to the historiography of children's literature developed out of scholarly inter- est in book collecting, bibliography, and the book arts; a romantic nostal- gia for childhood reading; and a conservative response to a rising tide of pluralism. Tenth, anxiety about the changing character of children's literature was expressed in research and in the criticism of children's books, the articulation of a literary canon of classic works, and the per- ception of the book as tool rather than art. These horizons informed the criticism and commentary on children's books in the late nineteenth century [103]. Publishers created a niche for children's books that became enlarged through expanding literacy as well as periodical coverage in reviews, commentary, and advertise- ments. The result was an unprecedented reviewing of children's litera- ture in the leading literary periodicals of the day and a heightened awareness of children's social, educational, and artistic development. The influence of these Victorian horizons persists into the twentieth century. In a continuity of cultural discourse, one horizon leads into another. While modern reading of Victorian children's books differs decidedly from the contemporary reception, we view these books with subtle lines of influence leading the reading backward and forward in time. Their horizons form part of our own. Curious variations of expectations exist in the reception of children's books in the late twentieth century. Some of these complexities and contradictions have historical roots in the late nineteenth century. Un- like the extensive coverage of the mainstream literary press, children's books are reviewed in a vast professional framework of publications and yet are virtually ignored by literary periodicals. The public knows only the few leading names of bestselling titles. Debate continues over the book as text or tool, as instruction or amusement. Fantasy and imagi- nation are suspect. Didacticism is diversified into social messages and technological formats that reflect and shape competing ideologies. The publishing of children's books is largely directed to adult consumers and a mass market. Literacy is defined by those who not only can read but who continue to do so beyond the schoolroom. Children and their literature are both marginalized and mythicized. The contemporary in- terest comes from similar provinces of deeply felt psychological, socio- logical, political, and spiritual needs as the modern age, like the late Victorian, nears a new century.
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 55 Appendix TABLE Al PERIODICAL REVIEWS OF CHILDREN'S BooKs EXAMINED IN THE PRESENT STUDY Reviews of Commentary on Titles Children's Books Children's Books Academy * All the Year Round 0 0 American Review of Reviews 0 Arena 0 Argosy Art Journal 0 0 Athenaeum a Atlantic Monthly * S Belgravia Blackwood's 0 0 Booklore 0 Bookman 0 Bnrtish Quarterly Reiew Century e Chamber's Journal Contemporary Review * Cornhill Critic * Current Literature * Dial 0 Eckectic Magazine * Edinburgh Review Education 0 a English Illustrated Magazine Fortnightly Review 0 Forum Gentleman's Magazine Girl's Own Paper Godey's Lady's Book Good Words * Graphic a Harper's Monthly 0 Harper's Weekly S Illustrated London News S Ladies Home Journal a Library Chronicle S Library Journal * 0 Lippincott's a Literary World * Living Age S London Quarterly Review * a
56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Appendix (continued) Reviews of Commentary on Titles Children's Books Children's Books Longman's Magazine Macmillan's Magazine Magazine of Art Modern Rew Murray's Magazine a Nation * a National Review a New England Magazine New Monthly Magazine New Quarterly New Review 0 New York Times Nineteenth Century * 0 North American Review * Outlook * 0 Publishers' Weekly 0 Punch * 0 Quarterly Review a Review of Reviews * a St. Nicholas 0 Saturday Review * a Scottish Review 0 Scribner's Magazine * 0 Scribner's Monthly 0 0 Spectator a Strand Magazine 0 Studio * S Sunday Magazine Temple Bar Time * Times m Tinsley's Magazine S Westminster Review 0 REFERENCES 1. Lundin, Anne H. "The Critical Reception of Kate Greenaway in England and America, 1879-1901." Ph.D. diss., University of Alabama, School of Library and Information Studies, 1992. 2. "Christmas Books." Times (December 20, 1883), p. 8. 3. Spectator 52 (December 6, 1879): 1549, 1555. 4. "Books for the Holidays." Dial 1 (December 1880): 159-62. 5. "Christmas Books." Graphic (November 4, 1882), p. 494.
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 57 6. "Christmas Books." Times (November 20, 1883), p. 4. 7. "Christmas Books." Graphic (October 20, 1888), p. 418. 8. "Children's Books." Nation 29 (December 11, 1879): 408. 9. "Christmas Books." Saturday Review 50 (November 20, 1880): 655-56. 10. "Children's Books." Saturday Review 54 (November 25, 1882): 711-12. 11. "Children's Books." Saturday Review 62 (November 27, 1886): 733-34. 12. "Illustrated Gift-Books." Illustrated London News (October 28, 1882), pp. 454-55. 13. "The Christmas Bookshelf." Graphic (October 29, 1892), p. 534. 14. "Books for Boys and Girls." Bookman 4 (December 1896): 385-90. 15. "Books for the Young." Dial 19 (December 1895): 339-43. 16. "Illustrated Juveniles." Dial 2 (December 1881): 180-82. 17. Henley, W. E. "Randolph Caldecott." Art Journal 43 (July 1881): 212. 18. "Art in the Nursery." Magazine of Art 6 (December 1882): 127-32. 19. Allen, Grant. "Some New Books." Fortnightly Review 151 (July 1, 1879): 144-54. 20. "Children's Books." Critic 1 (November 5, 1881): 307-8. 21. "Christmas Books." Graphic (November 5, 1881), p. 471. 22. "E. P. Dutton & Co.'s New Books." Critic 5 (December 6, 1884): xi. 23. "Christmas Books." Graphic (November 18, 1882), p. 559. 24. "Pictures and Stories for Little Readers." Dial 29 (December 1900): 506-7. 25. Crane, Walter. Of the Decorative Illu.stration of Books Old and New. London: George Bell & Sons, 1896. 26. Morse, James Herbert. "Robert Browning." Critic 11 (December 3, 1887): 263-64. 27. "Children's Books." Critic 2 (December 2, 1882): 327. 28. "Illustrated Books." Literary World 12 (September 24, 1881): 327-28. 29. "Our Monthly Gossip: Cheap Books." Lippincott's 25 (May 1880): 641-42. 30. "Books for and about Children." Atlantic Monthly 73 (June 1894): 850-54. 31. "Christmas Books." Times (December 5, 1889), p. 13. 32. "Children's Christmas Books." Art Journal 43 (December 1881): 380, 408. 33. "Our Literary List: Little Lord Fauntleroy." Murray's Magazine 1 (March 1887): 288. 34. "Children's Books." Art Journal 45 (January 1883): 21. 35. "On Some Books for Boys and Girls." Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine 159 (March 1896): 386-91. 36. Field, Mrs. E. M. The Child and His Book. London: Wells Gardner, Darton & Co., 1891. 37. Scudder, Horace. Childhood in Literature and Art, with Some Observations for Children: A Study. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1894. 38. "Juvenile Literature." American Monthly Review of Reviews 10 (December 1894): 698-700. 39. "Books for the Young." Dial 31 (December 1901): 449-50. 40. Salmon, Edward. "What Girls Read." Nineteenth Century 20 (October 1886): 515-29. 41. "Juvenile Literature." Current Literature 25 (March 1899): 206. 42. "Books for Children." Academy 36 (December 8, 1900): 558-62. 43. "Christmas Books." Times (December 9, 1885), p. 13. 44. "Christmas Books." Times (December 21, 1886), p. 13. 45. "Books for the Young." Dial 27 (December 1899): 432-33. 46. Shorter, Clement K. "The Reader: Victorian Literature." Bookman 11 (January 1897): 58-61. 47. "Novels for Family Reading." Saturday Review 21 (February 24, 1866): 238-39. 48. "Children's Christmas Books." Graphic (December 17, 1870), pp. 590-91. 49. Anstey, F. "On an Old-Fashioned Children's Book." Eclectic 63 (May 1896): 698- 705.
58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 50. Francis, M. E. "A Literary Causerie: Children's Literature." Academy 69 (September 9, 1905): 824-25. 51. "Literature for the Young." Critic 3 (May 26, 1883): 243-44. 52. "Fairy Literature." Current Literature 28 (June 1900): 246. 53. Hale, Edward. "On Writing for Children." Critic 5 (December 6, 1884): 267. 54. "Books and Reading." Quarterly Review 162 (1886): 501-18. 55. "Minor Notices of Books for the Young." Critic 11 (December 3, 1887): 285. 56. "General Gossip of Authors and Writers." Current Literature 1 (December 1888): 472. 57. "Books for the Young." Dial 17 (December 1894): 339-40. 58. "Meeting of Fairy Folk." Punch 109 (December 14, 1895): 287. 59. Holman, H. M. A. Education: An Introduction to Its Principles and Their Psychological Foundation. London: Isbister & Co., 1896. 60. Canton, William. "Bits about Books." Good Words (1896), pp. 213-14. 61. "General Gossip of Authors and Writers." Current Literature 4 (April 1890): 333. 62. "Fairy Tales." All the Year Round 10 (August 26, 1893): 198-203. 63. Sharp, Evelyn. "Footsteps to Fairyland." Pall Mall Magazine 23 (January 1901): 126-32. 64. Ralston, W. R. S. "Cinderella." Nineteenth Century 6 (November 1879): 832-53. 65. Ralston, W. R. S. "Puss in Boots." Nineteenth Century 13 (January 1883): 88-104. 66. Shepherd, Richard Herne. "An Unknown Fairy-Tale in Verse by Charles Lamb." Gentleman's Magazine 259 (August 1885): 188-96. 67. [Taylor, Una Ashworth]. "Fairy Tales as Literature." Edinburgh Review 188 (July 1898): 37-59. 68. "Minor Notices of Books for the Young." Critic 11 (December 3, 1887): 285. 69. "Fairy Literature." Current Literature 28 (June 1900): 246. 70. Wikel, Anna Hamlin. "The Child and His Book." Education 20 (May 1900): 544-47. 71. "Books for the Young." Dial 23 (December 1897): 342-43. 72. Sutton, H. "Children and Modern Literature." National Review 18 (December 1891): 507-19. 73. Maccunn, Florence. "Children's Story-Books." Good Words 44 (1904): 341-46. 74. "The Point of View: The Golden Age-Second Childhood in Literature." Scribner's Magazine 23 (January 1898): 123-24. 75. "The Point of View: 'The Child's Garden'-of Verses and Other Literature." Scribner's Magazine 19 (April 1896): 519-20. 76. "Books for and about Children." Atlantic Monthly 73 (June 1894): 853. 77. Edward, Louise Betts. "The Literary Cult of the Child." Critic 39 (August 1901): 167-70. 78. "Joies D'Enfants." Illustrated London News (December 13, 1890), p. 739. 79. Watts, Theodore. "The New Hero." English Illustrated Magazine 1 (December 1883): 181-90. 80. "The 'New Hero' and His Picture Books." Review of Reviews 16 (1897): 604. 81. Lanigan, Edith. "The Child in the Library." Atlantic Monthly 87 (January 1901): 121-25. 82. "Modern Nursery-Books." Spectator 83 (December 2, 1899): 841-42. 83. White, Gkleson. "Children's Books and Their Illustrators." Studio (Winter 1897-98), pp. 3-68. 84. Tuer, Andrew. Pages and Pictures from Forgotten Children's Books. London: Leadenhall Press, 1888-89. 85. Tuer, Andrew. Stories from Old-Fashioned Children's Books. London: Leadenhall Press, 1899-90.
VICTORIAN HORIZONS 59 86. History of the Horn-Book. London: Leadenhall Press, 1896. 87. Goody Two-Shoes, facsimile reprint of 1766 ed. with introduction by Charles Welsh. London: Griffith & Farran, 1881. 88. "Briefs on New Books." Dial 6 (June 1885): 49-53. 89. Hewins, Caroline. "The History of Children's Books." Atlantic Monthly 61 (January 1888): 112-26. 90. "Grandfather's Picture-Books." Strand 4 (1892): 199-208. 91. Low, Francis. "Favorite Books of Childhood." Strand 8 (1894): 128-36. 92. Waters, Alice. "Some Old Children's Books." Strand 15 (1898): 32-40. 93. Welsh, Charles. "The Early History of Children's Books in New England." New England Magazine 20 (March 1899): 147-60. 94. Marble, Annie Russell. "Children's Books of the Past." Critic 35 (December 1899): 1122-32. 95. Harker, L. Allen. "Some Eighteenth Century Children's Books." Longman's 38 (Octo- ber 1901): 548-57. 96. "Schoolroom Classics in Fiction-a Survey." Edinburgh Review 194 (October 1901): 414-37. 97. Salmon, Edward. "What Boys Read." Fortnightly Review (1886), quoted in "What Boys Read." Punch 80 (February 20, 1886): 96. 98. "Books for the Young." Dial 9 (December 1888): 211-14. 99. "Sensational Literature." All the Year Round 8 (September 24, 1892): 294-300. 100. Weisse, H. V. "Reading for the Young." Contemporary Review, vol. 79 (1901). 101. Weisse, H. V. "Reading for the Young." Eclectic 138 (September 1901): 228-46. 102. "Reading for Children." Outlook 69 (December 7, 1901): 866-68. 103. "The Best Hundred Books for Children." Eclectic 71 (June 1900): 800-802.