Mobilization of Rural Libraries toward Political and Economic Change in the Aftermath of the 2016 Presidential Election Bharat Mehra ABSTRACT The 2016 presidential election in the United States was unprecedented in the extent of bitter divi- siveness between the candidates’ campaigns, the complex factors attributed to the unexpected re- sults, and the difficult years in which the nation will reel from the short- and long-term effects. In its aftermath, an aggravated, broken nation extends rural libraries an extraordinary charge to help mend the splinters and move forward in their local environments. They have an opening to take ownership of a compelling responsibility as agents of democracy toward political, economic, and civic recovery. This think piece analyzes the implications of the 2016 presidential election for rural libraries primarily as information service providers that can aggressively further political informa- tion literacy, fluency, and advocacy and economic development as tools to nurture a more refined, responsive, respectful, and relevant form of democracy in the twenty-first century than what we have seen recently. T he 2016 presidential election in the United States has been unprecedented in the ex-tent of bitter divisiveness between the candidates’ campaigns, the complex factors at-tributed to the unexpected results, and the difficult years in which the nation will reel from the short- and long-term effects (Kurtzleben 2016). In its aftermath, an aggravated and broken nation extends rural libraries an extraordinary charge to help mend the splinters and move forward, if possible, in their local environments. They have an opening to take owner- ship of a responsibility as agents of democracy toward political, economic, and civic recovery if they choose to embrace this challenging obligation. It will mean venturing out of their com- fort zones to nurture creative networks and coalitions with religious leaders and politicians, small businesses and multinational conglomerates, educators and community advocates, and varied others to seek solutions to cultural, political, and economic challenges in a genuineThis article was developed from the text interview “Rural Libraries: Political and Economic Change,” which I gave to the Narratives Paths Journal (Journal for Experimenting with Ideas), available at http://www.ljfrank.com/archives/999. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 369–390. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8704-0009$10.00 369
370 • The Library Quarterlyand honest way. This article analyzes the implications of the 2016 presidential election for rural libraries primarily in the context of their potentially new mandate as information ser- vice providers that aggressively further political information literacy, fluency, and advocacy; effective information use; and economic development. Rural libraries can cultivate these tools to promote a more refined, responsive, respectful, and relevant form of democracy in the twenty-first century than what we have seen recently. As a critical and reflective opinion piece based on analysis of selected news media coverage, I present out-of-the-box thinking that calls for readers to keep an open mind while drawing their own conclusions from the narrative. Conditions of Rural Communities For some years now, an escalating feeling of isolation has marginalized residents of rural areas and positioned them as stragglers in technological access compared with their provincial and national counterparts (Mehra, Black, and Lee 2010; Mehra, Bishop, and Partee II 2016). The self- pronounced gurus of political discourse, the politicians, and the popular press and news media were indifferent toward these widely distributed rural communities, discounting them (or un- dervaluing their voices) until being shaken from their slumber by the unanticipated outcome of the 2016 presidential election. To analyze the disgruntled nature of the rural population in the United States—one reason behind the unexpected voting patterns that led to a swing in favor of Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton—this section notes key rural characteristics to draw implications for the role of rural libraries as proactive agents of American democracy. The word “rural” in this article encompasses shades of intersecting definitions andmeanings: according to the US Census Bureau, rural may be defined as areas with fewer than 2,500 people with low population density (Ratcliffe et al. 2016). The US Census Bureau considers rural areas anything not deemed an “urban area,” which is defined as a census block with population den- sity of at least 1,000 people per square mile and for which the surrounding census blocks have population density of at least 500 people per square mile (Ratcliffe et al. 2016). The Encyclopedia of Rural America discusses the related concept of nonmetropolitan counties, a means of account- ing for “suburbanization,” in which “nonmetropolitan” refers to “residence in a county that does not contain either a place with a minimum population of 50,000 or a Census Bureau-defined urbanized area of at least 100,000” (Rathge 2008, 836). In terms of statistics, the 2010 Census iden- tifies 59,492,267 people out of a total population of 308,745,538 (19.3%) as living in rural areas. More recently, this figure has increased to 20%, with key differences in specific parts of the coun- try (e.g., 42% rural in the Appalachian region) (Appalachian Regional Commission 2015). Rural libraries worldwide have experienced dynamic changes over the past decade. As we continue to observe the ubiquitous impact of the Internet and social media worldwide, there are two significant aspects of the false assumption that rural American communities and their libraries witness technological transformations in the same way as urban areas and other re- gions of the country. First are the concerns about the rural–urban digital divide and the gap
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 371in rural access to technology, computers, and the Internet that are still prevalent in the twenty- first century, at multiple levels, in widespread expanses in every part of the country.1 It is a grave mistake to assume that rural libraries have the same technological access as those in ur- ban areas. The rural communities in the United States, whether they are along the Appalachian Trail, in Idaho and the Dakotas, in Utah or Kansas, are scattered over vast, geographically iso- lated territories. Giant telecommunication service providers such as AT&T and Comcast have undervalued these rural tracts as prospective markets to amass profits, invest resources, and advance technological developments (e.g., by financing fiber optic cables delivering high-speed Internet) because of the low population density in these far-flung regions. This has resulted in a conscious disenfranchisement of rural populations. They are in a catch-22, where they have prospects dissimilar to their urban counterparts but also limited finances and other resources because companies and industries consider it unprofitable to locate there as a result of the lack of technology infrastructure (Lardner and Smith 2007). Over decades, this brutal pattern has left these areas with fewer jobs and increased unemployment, causing people to leave. Further- more, rural populations’ lack of technological access provides them no benefits of modern tech- nologies, resulting in no workforce opportunities, perpetuating meager salaries and wages, curtailing purchasing power, and restricting reserves for professional and personal growth. Cor- porate America and American capitalism have thus disenfranchised individuals from rural areas, pushing them into the double jeopardy of inequitable technological access and reduced eco- nomic benefit from technology (Gallardo 2016). Second, an understanding of the American rural public as left behind when the world is witnessing a technological revolution is related to a beyond-access assessment of technology adoption and the prerequisite to move the discourse to emphasize technology use instead of just technological access. Information literacy competency (or technological literacy skill) is relevant in this context. The American Library Association (1989) defines information literacy competency as a set of abilities for an individual “to recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information” (par. 3) or technological tools and applications that provide the information. The Middle States Com- mission on Higher Education (2003), which builds on the Association of College and Research Libraries’ (2000) definition of a related concept of information fluency, defines “information literacy” as “determining the nature and extent of needed information; accessing information effectively and efficiently; evaluating critically information and its sources; incorporating se- lected information in the learners knowledge base and value system; using information effec- tively to accomplish a specific purpose, understanding the economic, legal and social issues surrounding the use of information and information technology; and observing laws, regula- tion, and institutional policies related to the access and use of information” (32). James Rettig1. Rural Satellite and Cable Systems Loan Guarantee Proposal and the Digital Divide in Rural America: Hearing Before the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry, United States Senate, 106th Cong. (2000).
372 • The Library Quarterlyand Susan K. Hagen (2003) envision ties between information literacy, computer literacy (e.g., the information technology dimension), information fluency, and critical thinking that Ma- nuel Castells (2010) considered important in every person’s growth and development in a globally networked information society. A rural community deprived of information literacy (or one that lacks information fluency) determines and, as a cultural outcome, is determined as a result of poor technological oppor- tunities and limited economic resources. This is also tied to the educational-level gaps in rural areas, owing to deficiencies in economic possibilities. Low literacy, limited rates of high school graduation, and insufficient cultural value given to education are the collateral cultural dam- age causing and caused by a refutation of the prospects that economic progress and technol- ogy bring (Bageant 2007). Education can expose themind to real opportunities for an information-literate (or information- fluent) society. It liberates people to use technology effectively in the context of their lives. It also opens the possibilities to conquer their debilitating conditions, giving people a chance to address and change the troubling circumstances they encounter. Entangled in a hegemonic quicksand of decay that economic and technological denial represent in a rural society, the individual dis- covers a no-escape course that is worsened by dependency—stereotyped in perverse media rep- resentations as “victims of their own cultural inadequacy” (Lee 1996, 24), particularly in the rural Appalachian region—on alcohol, drugs, ignorance, and lack of exposure to diversity. This is also probably tied to the fact that, for example, rural Southerners are “much more likely than their rural counterparts in Eastern, Midwestern, and Western parts of the country to be highly reli- gious” (Dillon and Savage 2006, 1), among other variables. It is not unexpected that most of rural America is conservative, caught as it is in the stran- glehold of religion and religious leaders who champion a restrictive viewpoint of exclusion to sustain a status quo of unwarranted control, oppressing conditions, and marginalizing power subtleties and dynamics (Mann 2006). Over centuries, across the world, rural and other grass- roots populations have been kept uninformed or ill-informed (and diverted) so “that the lower classes should be kept firmly in their lower place” of social order and power (Lee and O’Grady 2000, 135). This strategy has been adopted by various religions and politicians “as a weapon used by established social forces” to “sanctify repressive institutions” (Siegel 2005, 42) and to maintain a stranglehold (Price 2002). People are compelled to think “that suffering belongs to life . . . implicit in the creaturely being of all that is, especially of the human creature” (Hall 1986, 63), so they are incapable of evading and become reliant on and compliant with religious belief systems such as the concept of an omnipotent “Almighty God” (14) that cannot be doubted or defied (Wald and Calhoun-Brown 2014). Many attributes of rural life are certainly wanted and needed (e.g., strength of close social ties, intimacy of community networks, strong social support systems, cultural rootedness, spir- ituality and religious faith and philosophy). Rural libraries need to recognize these attributes as
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 373assets to build on toward sustenance of individual reflection, representation, manifestation, liberty, ingenuity, initiative, effort, and diversity; purging of ignorance; and confrontation of in- stitutions that control and suppress. The reality of the rural–urban geographical divide in American politics deepened in 2016 and played a big role in shaping the results of the presidential election. City and country voters supported not only different parties but divergent communities; this is also related to the lim- itations of public perceptions and media coverage and their influence on the political process concerning the intertwining cultural issues and economic disparities of the rural–urban divide (Leatherby 2016). For example, as Jonathan Alter (2016) points out, “Rural counties [delivered] lopsided totals for Republicans that approach Democratic counts in black neighborhoods” (par. 13). With broad feelings of being “underemployed since the recession,” despite the actual health of the farming economy, quasireactionary nationalism, especially in rural areas, played a decisive role in the 2016 election, just as it “fueled the Brexit vote in Great Britain and rising right-wing populism across Europe” (Alter 2016, par. 14). So, too, American rural communities experienced this cultural slant—a sense that “elites have not only left them behind in the global economy but are looking down their noses at them while they favor immigrants and politically correct liberals” (Alter 2016, par. 14; see also Bloom 2016). This, according to Alter (2016), was perpetuated by a “Hillary Clinton hatred—complicated by her gender and her his- tory as a Clinton”—sparked by talk-radio hosts (e.g., Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, Mark Levin, Michael Savage) trashing the candidate, who “took more hits, for longer” than any other liberal figure “in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, as well as the rest of the country” (par. 15). News media coverage has also drawn correlations in analyses of the election results to Clinton’s inheritance, as part of the establishment, of a disgruntled working class and economic disillusionment with the past president’s limited delivery on his promise of change, namely, “to fix broken politics,” as reflected in Obama’s exploratory committee announcement: “America’s faced big problems before. But today our leaders in Washington seem incapable of working together in a practical, common-sense way. Politics has become so bitter and partisan, so gummed up by money and influence that we can’t tackle the big problems that demand solu- tions. That’s what we have to change first. We have to change our politics and come together around our common interests and concerns as Americans” (Cillizza 2017, par. 3). In this con- text, it is worthwhile to draw attention to certain aspects of American politics that were re- vealed through the unique circumstances surrounding the 2016 presidential election and to raise questions in its aftermath of what it might mean for rural libraries to serve as proactive democratic agents in a complex and troublesome contemporary political climate. The Ugly Truths: A Political Reality Check Several news articles questioned Donald Trump’s “seeming indifference” and limited under- standing of the US Constitution, “as he has launched attacks on the press, on mosques, and
374 • The Library Quarterlyon other institutions explicitly protected by the Bill of Rights” (Brettschneider 2016, par. 3) from early on in his campaign. During the Democratic National Convention, Khizr Khan, a Muslim American lawyer and father of an American soldier killed in Iraq, challenged the Re- publican to “look for the words ‘liberty’ and ‘equal protection of the law” (Willingham 2016, “1. Who is Khizr Khan?” video, 2:32) while waving a pocket copy of the Constitution in the air and referencing Trump’s call to ban Muslims from entering the country—a policy that would have prevented Khan’s heroic son from becoming an American. Other evidence of Trump’s unfair or unjust behaviors and demeaning comments about various groups of people was also reported. He had a “history of firing, disparaging, and fleecing veterans” (American Bridge 21st Century 2016). He appeared to mock disability (Fox News 2015). He said about Mexico and Mexican im- migrants, “They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people” (Reilly 2016, par. 1). On November 9, 2016, in the Telegraph, Claire Cohen began compiling the “Donald Trump Sexism Tracker: Every Offensive Comment in One Place,” which included entries for October 13, 2016, when a tape showed him leering at a 10-year-old girl, and October 7, 2016, when a video emerged of him talking about “grabbing [women] by the p****.” Other hateful rhetoric and insults Trump used during his presidential campaign to target groups or individuals included shaming of sexual assault victims; courting anti-LGBT groups; “viciously” attacking the federal judge overseeing the case “in which he’s [Trump is] accused of defrauding students through his failed Trump University venture” (D’Onofrio, Estrada, and Frenck 2016, “Trump Viciously Attacks,” par. 1); calling a former Miss Universe “Miss Piggy” and “Miss House- keeping”; calling Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren (a Democrat) “Pocahontas”; blaming “Blacks and Hispanics for the nation’s violent crime” (“On Blacks,” par. 1); stereotyping Asians; and “insulting journalists, politicians, his fellow candidates,” and the past president of the United States (“On Everyone Else,” par. 1). On the day that the results of the 2016 presidential election were announced, the Indepen- dent (Osborne 2016) featured a news item titled “Donald Trump Wins: All the Lies, Mistruths and Scare Stories He Told during the US Election Campaign.” Most Americans and the world were shocked by the unforeseen result in favor of President Trump, despite the news coverage documenting numerous incidents of his inappropriate language and behavior (e.g., lying, us- ing racist and sexist language), which most Americans believed were contrary to humanistic, ethical, and paradigmatic expectations of a candidate running for the highest political office in the country (Foster 2017). The unexpected result of the 2016 presidential election is also attributable to several re- ports of Hillary Clinton’s weaknesses (Drum 2016). These included loss of the millennial vote relative to 2012, a wounded working class and divides with college graduates, the press’s ob- session with Clinton’s e-mails, the mediocre economy, and questionable decisions by Clinton’s campaign team. Molly Ball (2016) noted, “The candidate herself believes James Comey, the FBI director who notified Congress in an October 28 letter that he was reopening the inquiry into
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 375her private emails, was to blame” (par. 1). Two other significant reasons behind Clinton’s de- feat were discussed in the press. One was unfounded charges of corruption: “Felony mishan- dling of classified information, including . . . closely guarded intelligence secrets; the misap- propriation and destruction of . . . government records” (McCarthy 2016, par. 1). The other was the “covert Russian campaign to interfere in the US presidential election” and intelligence of- ficials’ belief of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s personal involvement in the election hack used as a “vendetta” against Clinton (Arkin, Dilanian, and McFadden 2016). The involvement of the FBI, a supposedly nonpartisan agency, and the intense attention to the criminal charges against Clinton from which she was exonerated is in itself worthy of critical scrutiny but be- yond the scope of this article. What is extremely problematic are the allegations of the Russian foreign hand in the pres- idential election (e.g., their infiltration of the Democratic National Committee e-mail servers, hacking of private e-mail accounts of Democratic political figures, passing of those e-mail com- munications—and not the hacked data from the Republican National Committee—to Wiki- Leaks), leading to the unfavorable coverage of Clinton’s campaign and giving “credence to theories that Moscow actively favored” Trump (Fisher 2016, par. 17). “The evidence in any as- sessment of Russian government motives is circumstantial” (par. 19) but “does not diminish the seriousness of Russia’s intervention in the election, which appears to be unprecedented” (par. 16). Another fact that emerged during the 2016 presidential election was the difference in the results between the Electoral College vote and the popular vote. This was similar to the 2000 election, when Al Gore won the popular vote by around 500,000 votes yet had to concede victory to his opponent based on “the electoral college’s archaic-assed winner-take-all system [that] shifted our focus to those few hundred votes in south Florida which led to court chal- lenges, a Supreme Court decision and President GeorgeW. Bush” (Lyon 2016, par. 4). In the final Electoral College counts, Clinton received 227 votes and Trump got 304 votes.2 Based on final popular vote counts, Clinton got 65,844,610 votes (48.20%), whereas Trump got 62,979,636 votes (46.10%), lagging behind with 2,864,974 votes (4.35%) (Wasserman 2017). Yet, he won! That does not seem fair if one takes into account the American belief that each human being is equally important and that his or her voice and life are of as much value as any others. When it came to the 2016 presidential election, this aspect was irrelevant because in reality, every American vote did not hold the same weight, and the American president was chosen based on the current Electoral College system, “rigged” as it is against democracy (Cohen 2016). The “outdated, convoluted way” of the Electoral College from the eighteenth century, de- scribed in article II, section 1 of the US Constitution, originated in response to “severe eco-2. 270towin, “2016 Presidential Election Interactive Map,” 270towin, 2017, http://www.270towin.com/2016_Election /interactive_map.
376 • The Library Quarterlynomic instability in the 1780s,” which drafters of the Constitution blamed “on the national government (made weak by the Articles of Confederation), and on state lawmakers chosen by popular vote” (Luperon 2016, par. 2, 4). The Electoral College system used to choose the American president today was created in response to sociocultural, sociopolitical, and eco- nomic circumstances that are far different from the reality of life in the twenty-first century (Michener 2016). The dependence on such a process that emerged several centuries ago to choose a person for the highest position in the country seems nonsensical, similar to a lit- eral (not symbolic) interpretation of religious texts (e.g., Vedas, Bible, Quran) in a day and age when human life experience is so removed from the sociocultural conditions of the times when these revered documents originated. Does this reflect any progress in human thought, efficacy, and agency, or are we so tied to the shackles of our selective political history that this cultural umbilical cord cannot be broken? This is a point for readers to consider that might be quite controversial and hotly debated.The Dirty Picture of American Politics Understandably, the news of President Trump’s victory was really shocking because it broke myths and illusions about the United States of America and its people. What is the implication of President Trump’s victory despite his “nasty”3 representation and behavior through the en- tirety of his election campaign, grave allegations of Russian foreign involvement in political tampering and in tarnishing his opponent’s credibility, and the political reliance on a stagnant system that was created several centuries ago? Does it mean that the nation’s political process and its brand of democracy are flawed? Does it imply that the nation did not care for these matters when it voted or about the American ideals of equality, freedom, liberty, justice, and all that the Founders believed in when they created the Constitution and the Bill of Rights? Does it mean that the rhetoric surrounding the image of democratic values representative of the United States is far from the reality of the American people and their real thoughts, true feelings, and bitter actions toward each other? Does it mean that there were other factors that the public considered more important while voting during the 2016 presidential election (e.g., the painted picture of the poor economy and the reasons attributed as its cause, the perceived weaknesses of Clinton as the other candidate of choice)? Also, with logical and fair minds, how can we ignore the difference in vote count between the Electoral College and the popular vote and the reality that there was no recourse in the currently established political process to ad- dress this monumental grievance (a recurrence of the 2000 political fiasco) that is contrary to the public rhetoric associated with American democracy that every vote counts?3. The reference to the word “nasty” here is to Donald Trump’s comment, “Such a nasty woman,” about his opponent at the end of the final presidential debate on October 19, 2016.
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 377There is no definite answer to any of these provocative questions, and maybe all these as- pects (and more) have some relevance to the discussion. Yet, the truth of the matter is the reality of President Trump’s victory, which is based on the current practice of politics and the political process in the United States. In this volatile environment in the aftermath of the 2016 presidential election, when the moral fiber of the nation is under question all around the world, rural libraries emerge as critical and reflective providers of accurate political infor- mation that might help the public decode recent (and ongoing) political experiences and ex- pose the differences between the ideals and the realities of American politics that the above questions raise. Furthermore, responding to the process of the 2016 presidential election and the traumatic experience and journey that the nation has witnessed, rural libraries now have to step up and take a much more dynamic and critical role as emblematic and literal spaces of resistance in exposing the dirty aspects of American politics touched upon in this article. The critique highlights the function of rural libraries to apply (and operationalize) political infor- mation literacy and fluency in promoting reflections, public discourse, and public training on the one hand and in actively mobilizing political information advocacy on the other—in ed- ucation and activism on, to name a few topics, the nature of American democracy and political information, the difference between myth and reality in American politics, American politics as primarily an entertainment business, and the hegemonic nexus of American politics, the news media, the entertainment industry, and corporations. It is imperative in these difficult times, and in years to come, that rural libraries take a lead- ership role in blowing the whistle on these aspects of American politics that are often ignored or barely touched upon in media coverage and on election campaign efforts that try only to foment political agitation and shape public opinion to manipulate niche voting blocs among the diverse publics to support one candidate or the other. This article highlights some of the contentious themes as threads in the authentic nature of American politics based on the po- litical experiences during and since the 2016 presidential election. Readers should draw impli- cations for rural libraries in promoting political information literacy, fluency, and advocacy through their resources, programs, services, and political information access. If nothing else, one aspect has become absolutely clear while contemplating the three presidential debates, the entire 2016 election campaign, and the coverage of the politics since, including episodes of TV talk shows discussing politics (e.g., The Late Show with Stephen Colbert on CBS, The O’Reilly Factor on Fox News, Face the Nation on CBS News, Hardball with Chris Matthews on MSNBC): the intertwining relationship between entertainment and politics, and politics and entertainment, is certainly blurred, and their mixture is more complex than the American public realizes and is not critiqued by the mainstream press in a significant manner. When reading between the lines of Alec Baldwin’s mimicking of President Trump on Saturday Night Live, for example, the spoofing of recent political occurrences and interactions also reveals a
378 • The Library Quarterlysimilar tragic analysis. That is, appreciating deprecating humor does seem to distract from the idea that politics provides great material for entertainers (and vice versa), and these shows’ high ratings help media moguls continue to make enormous amounts of money. Further- more, President Trump’s recent conduct (contrary to that of past political candidates and pres- idents) in posting on Twitter and other social media outlets about every occurrence in the entertainment-political industry that upsets him or catches his attention shows how deeply intertwined politics and entertainment are under the guise of news that the hungry masses lap up. Both politicians and entertainers are performing (intentionally or unintentionally) and providing fodder for the other on which to survive and thrive, obviously these days, while churning the wheels of news consumption and profits in a hegemonic capitalist society. There is not much of a difference between what we are witnessing in entertainment news coverage and the actual political happenings represented. All this is great for a vibrant and engaged democracy (e.g., in making a mockery of itself) unless we probe closely into who has benefited financially from the 2016 presidential election and their relationships—information often hidden from public view. For example, “6 corpo- rations control 90% of the media in America . . . consolidated from 50 companies back in 1983” (Lutz 2012, title, par. 2). GE, News Corp, Disney, Viacom, Time Warner, and CBS (with several companies nested under them) have 232 media executives regulating the information diet of 277 million Americans, generating a total revenue in 2010 of $275.9 million for the “big six” (Jason 2011). More recently, Kate Vinton (2016) reported for Forbes that 15 billionaires “own part or all of several of America’s influential national newspapers . . . in addition to magazines, local papers and online publications” (par. 2): Michael Bloomberg (Bloomberg LP and Bloomberg Media), Rupert Murdoch (News Corp), Donald and Samuel “Si” Newhouse (Advance Publica- tions), the Cox Family (Atlanta Journal-Constitution), Jeff Bezos (the Washington Post), John Henry (the Boston Globe), Sheldon Adelson (the Las Vegas Review-Journal), Joe Mansueto (Inc. and Fast Company magazines), Mortimer Zuckerman (US News & World Report, New York Daily News), Barbey family (the Village Voice), Stanley Hubbard (Hubbard Broadcasting), Patrick Soon-Shiong (Tribune Publishing Co.), Carlos Slim Helu (the New York Times), Warren Buffet (regional daily papers), and Viktor Vekselberg (Gawker). Problematic aspects of orchestrating the political as entertainment at the center of cultural experience for the American people are revealed only when we critically analyze political events for their entertainment value and document who gains financially from the vast numbers of viewers and listeners. The following are a few other dirty aspects of American politics for librarians to examine more closely in developing content delivery and promoting political information literacy, flu- ency, and advocacy in their rural communities: First, in their Manifesto of the Communist Party, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels ([1888] 1969) critiqued politics as a commodity like any other in a capitalist society. Check the Wall Street
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 379Journal’s “2016 Election: Market Reactions,”4 which highlights how stocks, bonds, currencies, and commodities reacted to the 2016 presidential election as evidence of how Marx and Engels’s critique is still valid, even after all this time. Second, tracing back to the Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas debates in 1858 and calling them a “traveling circus,” Charles Lane (2015), opinion writer for the Washington Post, states that “American political campaigns are, were and always have been entertainment. Not like entertainment. Entertainment” (par. 5). Period. This calls into question how trustwor- thy much of what is presented during political campaigns is. Third, in his analysis of political information, Markus Prior (2005) at Princeton University notes that the boundaries between news and entertainment are blurred and points to a dif- ference “between people who prefer news and people who prefer entertainment” (577). In “Entertainment Trumps All in US Election,” Micah Halpern (2016) reported for the Jerusalem Post that the 2016 presidential election “has been turned into more of an entertainment event than a news event. Voters and media are equally guilty. And it is mostly because of Donald Trump” (par. 4). Fourth, politics and its news coverage are entertainment, and they sell. Brian Stelter (2016) reported for CNN that the first presidential debate between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton broke records: “Well over 80 million people tuned in . . . setting a new record in the sixty year history of televised presidential debates” (par. 1). Cable news channels drew big increases over past election years, and all channels captured large audiences: NBC with the biggest audience overall (more than 18 million), ABC (13.5 million), CBS (12.1 million), Fox News (11.4 million), CNN (9.9 million), the Fox broadcast network (5.5 million), MSNBC (4.9 million), and the Spanish-language Univision (2.5 million) and Telemundo (1.8 million) (Stelter 2016). In com- parison, the final debate on October 19, 2016, which took place at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, drew an audience of approximately 71.5 million viewers, “slightly ahead of the sec- ond debate about a week and a half [before], which brought in 69 million viewers” (Morrow 2016, par. 2). No wonder that, as Lee Fang (2016) reported for the Intercept, major political news outlets offered interviews for sale at the Democratic and Republican National Conventions (in anticipation of high interests and the resulting big bucks) to high-rolling special interests “looking to make an impression,” such as lobbyists for the oil industry “picking up the tab for leading Beltway publications to host energy policy discussions at the convention, including The Atlantic and Politico” (par. 1). Fifth, the historically large audience of consumers of political information during and since the 2016 presidential election translates into highly increased revenue from advertising,4. Last updated November 11, 2016, http://www.wsj.com/livecoverage/markets-real-time-stocks-bonds-currency -commodities-11-07.
380 • The Library Quarterlyamong other streams of income, for news media corporations and entertainment industry conglomerates. For example, in anticipation of the election, Peter Liguori, the chief executive of Tribune Company, said in May 2015 that the forthcoming presidential campaign represented “enormous opportunity” for advertising sales: “Speaking at a conference hosted by J.P. Morgan Chase, Liguori, whose company owns television stations, referenced Super PAC spending as a key factor for why he thinks Tribune Co. political advertising revenue will rocket from $115 mil- lion in 2012 to about $200 million for the 2016 campaign cycle,” according to Fang (2015, par. 2). Similar to these anticipated returns in sales by all news companies owing to an “appetite for stories” and an orchestrated frenzy in public consumption of the 2016 presidential election pro- cess (Risen 2016), way back in August 2015, very high expenditures were expected for TV adver- tisements during the 2016 campaigns ($4.4 billion) (Kurtzleben 2015). Paul Farhi (2016) reported in the Washington Post that both “Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton have been very, very good for the cable news networks” (par. 1), with CNN, Fox News, and MSNBC reaping unprecedented profits owing to both their presidential campaigns and subsequent improved ratings for the multinational news networks: [CNN’s] network and its related media businesses will approach $1 billion in gross profit in 2016, a milestone unseen in its 36-year history. The internal estimate reflects a double- digit increase over 2015. . . . Fox News, the longtime ratings leader among cable news outlets, was already in the billion-dollar profit club before 2016. . . . Its gross profit will top $1.67 billion, according to SNL Kagan, a media research company. . . . Third-ranked MSNBC, which falls under the larger NBC News umbrella, will have projected earnings of $279.6 million this year, according to Kagan. . . . Its projected profits reflect a 19 per- cent growth rate over 2015, compared with 14 percent for CNN and 11.3 percent for Fox, according to Kagan. (par. 2–4) Regarding Donald Trump, the Media Research Center (2017) charged NBC with spending “more than a decade in building [Trump’s] brand as a successful businessman of almost mythic pro- portion” (par. 1). It recommended the network become transparent about its ties and “dis- close its previous contractual relationships with him” and cited the Society of Professional Journalists’ code of ethics, which “admonishes conflicts of interest, both real and perceived and advises journalists to ‘Explain ethical choices and processes to audiences’ ” (par. 95). On October 18, 2016, Dave Levinthal reported for the Center for Public Integrity that several “peo- ple identified in federal campaign finance filings as journalists, reporters, news editors or tele- vision news anchors—as well as other donors known to be working in journalism—have com- bined to give more than $396,000 to the presidential campaigns” of both political candidates (par. 7). On February 9, 2016, the New York Times developed a list of million-dollar donors in the 2016 presidential race, identifying that “In a stark departure from previous elections, most of
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 381the money . . . is flowing not into the campaigns, but into outside groups like ‘super PACs’ and other political organizations that are allowed to raise unlimited amounts of money from wealthy individuals, labor unions and corporations” (par. 1). Such resources need to be scruti- nized carefully for any potential connections among campaign donations, multinational com- panies, and news networks with vested interests in the political process and conflicts of interest for those responsible for covering these events and activities. This reality of American politics is a real problem, according to Bernie Sanders and others who have called for “an end to big money in politics” (Thomas 2016, par. 1). “Political dona- tions corrupt democracy in ways you might not realize,” and direct evidence of campaign do- nors’ ties to news network corporations seeking to gain from the political activities that they are held professionally responsible to cover may be limited, as news companies, corporations, and politicians are affiliated with each other in informal social networks beyond what is visible to the public gaze (Smith 2014). In the United States, this nexus of politics, the “corporate news media system,” and the entertainment industry is most problematic and needs to be urgently exposed and the “utter corruption of the media policy making process” (McChesney 2015, xxxviii–xxxix) dismantled if we are to move beyond the lip service as a truly democratic society. Call for Rural Library Action Who better than rural librarians—with their motivation and skills to further education, infor- mation literacy and fluency, and critical advocacy—to gather evidence and help the public be- come aware of these hegemonic connections so that they can make informed and wise voting decisions? Two additional facts (regardless of the reasons attributed to them) that emerged in the aftermath of the 2016 presidential election are worth noting: (1) the relatively large num- ber of rural people who ventured out to cast their votes in comparison to predictions and the prevailing politics of resentment and distrust of the past political establishment in the rural consciousness (Cramer 2016) and (2) the importance of the economy as “the top issue with voters” (Gandel 2016, par. 1) and the possible disillusionment of working-class voters in shaping the election’s outcome (Marcotte 2017). Relating to this scenario in the election’s aftermath, as memory institutions, rural libraries can play a more relevant role in promoting political liter- acy, fluency, and advocacy to bring about political, economic, and cultural change in their local and regional communities. The concept of “rural” needs to be redefined, although this poses several significant chal- lenges for libraries today and in the future. First, libraries may be the only sanctuaries from the image of rural areas as gloomy places of no escape with restricted technological and economic potential, smothering religion, and an outlook permeated by dogma and separation. Regard- less of the perceptions surrounding their roles as providers of accurate and trustworthy infor- mation, libraries can offer individuals a positive direction and tangible opportunities to trans-
382 • The Library Quarterlyform their harsh life conditions. Furthermore, in many places, rural libraries are the only places that offer free access to technology and the Internet and to trained professionals who might be able to assist people in becoming information literate and fluent, applying information ad- vocacy, and identifying professional and personal solutions to help them grow in their think- ing and approach to life with real, concrete choices. Adopting a constructive approach, in con- trast to that historically taken, rural librarians have to recognize the experiences, perspectives, assets, and strengths of their users as an important step in this regard (Mehra and Singh 2017). In the past, rural (and other) librarians have internalized an outdated service-ethics model of helping people, instead of a more progressive approach of helping people help themselves, thus mistreating their users as needy and helpless, reflecting an overzealous missionary point of view and perpetuating imbalanced power dynamics that have served neither their profes- sion nor their communities well (Mehra, Rioux, and Albright 2009; Mehra and Rioux 2016). The hurdles facing rural libraries include the hegemonic players that subjugate rural com- munities—the mafia-like political, religious, and economic institutions that maintain control of individuals, perpetuating the unfair and morbid circumstances of economic marginaliza- tion. Another challenge is for libraries to influence public perceptions to probe, defy, and alter the existing state of affairs in a community that often might not recognize the importance of change. Looking internally, rural libraries also need to critically evaluate themselves and to refurbish what they do and how they tell the story of what they do. Changing public per- ceptions of what the rural library offers the community calls for a strategic, meticulous ap- proach in marketing and public relations to access, apprise, and educate all constituents. Cur- rently, most people in many rural (and other) parts of the country do not identify the library as an option for helping them in making life-altering decisions to overcome their economic situations. Rural libraries offer numerous benefits as key information providers because they have the resources, services, and staff to support the public, but whether people know of the difference that rural libraries can make in their lives is questionable. We live life through the lens of analysis and understanding built on past experiences. Rural librarians can possibly span the breaches in the rural challenge by offering information that can provide options to overcome scarce knowledge and limited financial means to give indi- viduals liberty to do something about their difficult conditions. Furthermore, intolerance re- lated to fear of difference based on race, sex, sexual orientation, or country of origin is unam- biguously connected to limited worldly knowledge, and information access and effective use might help diminish it. Nonetheless, the actuality of the role of libraries (including academic, public, and school libraries and other cultural heritage institutions) in rural communities speaks for itself, regard- less of whether one believes in libraries’ value. The fact of the matter is that historically, the library institution (especially in the rural environment) has been stereotyped in the United States as representing white middle-class women in the typecast community point of view.
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 383Moreover, little current evidence indicates that contemporary libraries (or librarians) have more than a few seats at the table of influence and authority in rural networks where crucial economic verdicts get made, laws passed, and policies devised that modulate every facet of rural public life. Moreover, local politics have tremendous power over libraries and what they can or cannot do in rural communities. The limiting and facilitating realities are frequently tied to the dic- tates and imposing disposition of religious and political control in preserving an addiction to faith and belief over rationality, maintaining entrenched economic disparities. The rural li- brary also has to tackle the bureaucracy presently embodied in unreceptive or micromanaging library boards, poor rankings of the library (and education) by public administrators, and an absence of local library advocacy. Rural librarians can defy these deeply rooted prejudices shap- ing belief and institutional systems of praxis (internal and external) by venturing out of their spaces of privilege and their inner-directed, long-embraced ways of practice to transform themselves (and public perceptions about them) as community anchors and advocates of change (Fuller 2016). Building partnerships that nurture collaborations across community boundaries, be they with local politicians and government officials, small businesses and chambers of commerce, or other movers and shakers in rural settings, is a strategy that might lead to change of the status quo of economic disparity and of traditional dicta of authority and control. Educating and empowering people as change agents is another way for various stakeholders at individual, societal, and community levels to alter their specific marginalized conditions. Probing the un- healthy ties among corporations, politicians, and religion is another action that rural librarians can spearhead to help eradicate the blind faith, ignorance, and intolerance that is believed to thrive in rural communities. This will necessitate librarians taking ownership of their commu- nity advocacy role, a stance they have historically denied themselves, fearful of breaking out of the restricted neutral-spectator mold imposed from within and without. This is especially im- portant for the rural library to become the place to further economic and political development and community-building efforts to revitalize the economy, create jobs and workforce opportu- nities, and help in the cultural growth and economic fulfillment of its residents (Bishop, Mehra, and Partee II 2016; Mehra, Bishop, and Partee II 2017). Conclusion The controversies that were widely debated in forums during the 2016 presidential election seem to have been partially cast aside as old news and forgotten as soon as the results were announced. In his victory speech, President Trump stated, “Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division; have to get together. To all Republicans and Democrats and indepen- dents across this nation, I say it is time for us to come together as one united people” (Federal News Services 2016, par. 15). Only marginal effort has been made for political accountability for
384 • The Library Quarterlypast behaviors because what happened seems now to be considered acceptable as part of a divisive election campaign. On December 15, 2016, in Business Insider, Jason Guerrasio quoted Trevor Noah as saying of the president’s speeches in an episode of The Daily Show: “The Donald voices some political opinion and then Truth Trump slips in and tells you the real deal” (par. 3). Acknowledging that “It throws everyone off because politicians aren’t supposed to be honest about their lying” (par. 8), Noah goes on to provide a few examples, including President Trump’s responses to the “Lock her up” chants, referring to Clinton, that were prevalent at his rallies leading up to the election: “That plays great before the election. Now we don’t care” (par. 10). For people all around the world, especially younger people, we do care what kind of model the president sets for the nation. One lesson an observer might misperceive is that the ends justify the means, as reflected in the many lies, false accusations, and unfounded claims that were thrown around callously throughout the election campaign across party lines. In this larger-than-life cultural and political context, maybe it is expecting too much of ru- ral libraries to challenge and stem the decay in American politics that, although it has been part of the nation’s history, has only recently become the in-your-face crudeness of the 2016 presidential election. In Insane Clown President: Dispatches of the 2016 Circus, Matt Taibbi (2017) shows President Trump’s “bloviating and farting his way” through the 2016 presidential contest as part of the “story of Western civilization’s very own train wreck” tied closely to the threads of this poignant historical moment characterized by “the power of spectacle over sub- stance, or even truth; the absence of a shared reality; the nihilistic rebellion of the white work- ing class; the death of the political establishment; and the emergence of a new, explicit form of white nationalism that would destroy what was left of the Kingian dream of a successful pluralistic society” (xxvii). Given President Trump’s background “as a master brander and showman who ran beauty pageants as a sideline” (Rucker and Tumulty 2016, par. 2), we have now an entertaining political soap opera going on nearly every day, but it affects all our lives in turbulent ways, so it is much more than mere entertainment in real terms for real people (e.g., undocumented immigrants, transgender students, American Muslims, and others who continue to be targeted by President Trump’s communications, laws, and policies). Others say that we need this and that for the first time Americans are forced to face how racist, sexist, homophobic we truly are because an active discourse is taking place at the na- tional level as never before, thanks to President Trump’s role in shaking the complacencies and revealing the true colors of the American psyche. Yet, if not rural libraries, then who is willing to call attention to these ugly truths of dirty politics? It will not be the American news media businesses that have become richer from the election or the politicians and legislators who are interested only in staying in office, passing laws that fill their pockets, and favoring the companies with which they have alliances or from which they receive support during elec- tions (Teachout 2014). And it will probably not be the conglomerates that have little social
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 385responsibility (Mizruchi 2013) or we, the American people, who are complacent in our day-to- day lives as we grovel for security (Gabler 2016). It is probably young people and their educators who are the hope during these depressing times. And yes, this includes us, their librarians. So, I call here for rural libraries to become the vibrant places that might provide opportunities for younger people to engage in and question American democracy in thoughtful, critical ways. To extend the role of rural libraries is per- tinent, as they are providers of authoritative and accurate information, adopters of an educa- tional mission in information literacy and fluency, active information advocates of progressive social and cultural changes, and creators of services and programs that support equitable and fair information access and use to further social justice and social equity to underserved pop- ulations (Mehra 2015). For rural libraries to respond accordingly, they must also become the places that develop connections, partnerships, and collaborations with young people, workers, businesses, government officials, educators, and other stakeholders to open up job opportu- nities, entrepreneurial growth, and development of the workforce, to name a few practical economic tasks. Such a role will mean adopting concepts and policies centered strongly on efforts that promote cultural, political, and economic change. It will mean becoming innova- tors and leaders who strategically develop and implement political information literacy, flu- ency, and advocacy efforts that have not been introduced or practiced before. The murkiness that we experienced during the 2016 presidential election thus offers op- portunities for rural libraries to embrace information literacy, fluency, and advocacy in eco- nomic and cultural contexts of mobilization and action. For rural libraries to escape the fate of the dodo—the bird that met its end owing to its inability to fly—they have to learn to adapt and take flight in this complex, volatile, and changing cultural and political era. To reflect the paradoxical nature of these trying times and, symbolically, the rural libraries’ role in a spirit of imaginative optimism, the rebirth of a phoenix from the ashes of its predecessor seems a poi- gnant vision. Whether rural libraries will end up as the dead dodo or a reborn phoenix, only time will tell.References Alter, Jonathan. 2016. “Seven Reasons Why Hillary Clinton Lost and Donald Trump Won.” Daily Beast, No- vember 14. http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/14/seven-reasons-why-hillary-clinton-lost -and-donald-trump-won.html. American Bridge 21st Century. 2016. “Donald Trump’s History of Firing, Disparaging, and Fleecing Veter- ans.” American Bridge 21st Century, July 26. https://americanbridgepac.org/donald-trumps-history-of-firing -disparaging-and-fleecing-veterans/. American Library Association. 1989. American Library Association Presidential Committee on Information Literacy: Final Report. Chicago: American Library Association. http://www.ala.org/acrl/publications/whitepapers /presidential.
386 • The Library QuarterlyAppalachian Regional Commission. 2015. “Appalachia Then and Now: Examining Changes to the Appala- chian Region since 1965.” Executive summary. Appalachian Regional Commission. https://www.arc .gov/assets/research_reports/AppalachiaThenAndNowCompiledReports.pdf. Arkin, William M., Ken Dilanian, and Cynthia McFadden. 2016. “U.S. Officials: Putin Personally Involved in U.S. Election Hack.” NBC News, December 15. http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/u-s-officials -putin-personally-involved-u-s-election-hack-n696146. Association of College and Research Libraries. 2000. Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Educa- tion. Chicago: American Library Association. http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracy competency#ildef. Bageant, Joe. 2007. Deer Hunting with Jesus: Dispatches from America’s Class War. New York: Three Rivers. Ball, Molly. 2016. “Why Hillary Clinton Lost.” The Atlantic, November 15. https://www.theatlantic.com /politics/archive/2016/11/why-hillary-clinton-lost/507704/. Bishop, Bradley Wade, Bharat Mehra, and Robert P. Partee II. 2016. “The Role of Rural Public Libraries in Small Business Development.” Public Library Quarterly 35 (1): 37–48. Bloom, Rebecca. 2016. “10 Reasons Hillary Clinton Lost the 2016 Presidential Election.” ListLand, Novem- ber 22. http://www.listland.com/10-reasons-hillary-clinton-lost-2016-presidential-election/. Brettschneider, Corey. 2016. “Trump vs. the Constitution: A Guide.” Politico, August 4. http://www.polit ico.com/magazine/story/2016/08/2016-donald-trump-constitution-guide-unconstitutional-freedom -liberty-khan-214139. Castells, Manuel. 2010. The Rise of the Networked Society. 2nd ed. Vol. 1, The Information Age: Economy, Society, and Culture. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. Cillizza, Chris. 2017. “10 Years Ago Today Obama Made a Huge Promise. He Didn’t Keep It.”Washington Post, January 17. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/01/17/the-one-big-promise-president -obama-couldnt-keep/?utm_term5.590489a7c17c. Cohen, Claire. 2017. “Donald Trump Sexism Tracker: Every Offensive Comment in One Place.” Telegraph, January 20. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/politics/donald-trump-sexism-tracker-every-offensive -comment-in-one-place/. Cohen, David S. 2016. “How the Electoral College Rigged the Election for Donald Trump.” Rolling Stone, November 16. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/features/how-the-electoral-college-rigs-elections -for-republicans-w450749. Cramer, Katherine J. 2016. The Politics of Resentment: Rural Consciousness in Wisconsin and the Rise of Scott Walker. Chicago Studies in American Politics Series. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Dillon, Michele, and Sarah Savage. 2006. “Values and Religion in Rural America: Attitudes toward Abortion and Same-Sex Relations.” National Issue Brief no. 1. Carsey School of Public Policy at the Scholars’ Re- pository, University of New Hampshire. http://scholars.unh.edu/carsey/12. D’Onofrio, Kaitlyn, Sheryl Estrada, and Moses Frenck. 2016. “Trump’s Record of Hate to Date.” DiversityInc, May 26. http://www.diversityinc.com/news/trumps-record-of-hate-to-date/. Drum, Kevin. 2016. “The 3 Big Reasons Hillary Clinton Lost.” Mother Jones, November 21. http://www .motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2016/11/why-clinton-lost-bitter-bernie-crooked-comey-and-wounded -working-class. Fang, Lee. 2015. “Media Executives Are Salivating over Big Money Flooding the 2016 Election Cycle.” The Intercept: Unofficial Sources (blog), May 22. https://theintercept.com/2015/05/22/one-group-americans -drool-wall-wall-presidential-campaign-ads-next-year-media-companies/.
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 387Fang, Lee. 2016. “Major Political News Outlets Offer Interviews for Sale at DNC and RNC Conventions.” The Intercept: Unofficial Sources (blog), July 1. https://theintercept.com/2016/07/01/convention-parties-lobby/. Farhi, Paul. 2016. “One Billion Dollars Profit? Yes, the Campaign Has Been a Gusher for CNN.” Washington Post, October 27. https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/one-billion-dollars-profit-yes-the -campaign-has-been-a-gusher-for-cnn/2016/10/27/1fc879e6-9c6f-11e6-9980-50913d68eacb_story.html ?utm_term5.5c2dc64a55a7. Federal News Services. 2016. “Election 2016: Transcript: Donald Trump’s Victory Speech.” New York Times, November 9. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/10/us/politics/trump-speech-transcript.html. Fisher, Max. 2016. “Russia and the U.S Election: What We Know and Don’t Know.” New York Times, Decem- ber 12. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/world/europe/russia-trump-election-cia-fbi.html?_r51. Foster, J. D. 2017. 2016: The Campaign Chronicles: The Journey to Trump. Bloomington, IN: Xlibris. Fox News. 2015. “Republicans: Trump Called Out for Appearing toMock Disability.” Fox News, November 26. http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2015/11/26/trump-called-out-for-appearing-to-mock-disability.html. Fuller, Sarah. 2016. “Community Anchors: Introducing a NewGrant Project Category.” UpNext (blog), July 28. https://www.imls.gov/news-events/upnext-blog/2016/07/community-anchors-introducing-new-grant -project-category. Gabler, Neal. 2016. “The Secret Shame of Middle-Class Americans.” The Atlantic, May. http://www .theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/05/my-secret-shame/476415/. Gallardo, Roberto. 2016. Responsive Countryside: The Digital Age and Rural Communities. Oktibbeha County: Mis- sissippi State University Extension Service. Gandel, Stephen. 2016. “Election 2016: The Economy Was More Important Than Anything, Exit Polls Say.” Fortune, November 8. http://fortune.com/2016/11/08/election-economy-exit-polls/. Guerrasio, Jason. 2016. “Trevor Noah: Donald Trump Is Finally Telling the Truth about His ‘Lying.’” Business Insider, December 15. http://www.businessinsider.com/trevor-noah-donald-trump-telling-the-truth -2016-12. Hall, Douglas John. 1986. God and Human Suffering: An Exercise in the Theology of the Cross. Minneapolis: Augsburg. Halpern, Micah D. 2016. “Entertainment Trumps All in US Election.” Jerusalem Post, August 28. http://www .jpost.com/Opinion/Entertainment-trumps-all-in-US-election-466269. Jason. 2011. “Media Consolidation: The Illusion of Choice.” FrugalDad.com (blog), November 22. http://www .frugaldad.com/media-consolidation-infographic/. Kurtzleben, Danielle. 2015. “2016 Campaigns Will Spend $4.4 Billion on TV Ads, but Why?” NPR, August 19. http://www.npr.org/sections/itsallpolitics/2015/08/19/432759311/2016-campaign-tv-ad-spending. Kurtzleben, Danielle. 2016. “The Most ‘Unprecedented’ Election Ever? 65 Ways It Has Been.” NPR, July 3. http://www.npr.org/2016/07/03/484214413/the-most-unprecedented-election-ever-65-ways-it-has-been. Lane, Charles. 2015. “It’s Not Just Donald Trump—Politics Has Always Been about Entertainment.” Wash- ington Post, August 5. https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/politics-as-spectacle/2015/08/05 /97bc3e86-3b88-11e5-b3ac-8a79bc44e5e2_story.html?utm_term5.547328d0eca4. Lardner, James, and David A. Smith. 2007. Inequality Matters: The Growing Economic Divide in America and Its Poisonous Consequences. New York: New. Leatherby, Lauren. 2016. “US Urban-Rural Political Divide Deepened in 2016.” Financial Times, November 15. https://www.ft.com/content/f7c7dd96-ab65-11e6-ba7d-76378e4fef24. Lee, Alvin A., and Jean O’Grady, eds. 2000. Collected Works of Northrop Frye: Northrop Frye on Religion (Excluding The Great Code and Words with Power). Vol. 4. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
388 • The Library QuarterlyLee, Renée Gravois. 1996. “Uneasy Tensions in Health Care Delivery in a Rural Appalachian Coal Mining Community: Envisioning Alternative Solutions.” PhD diss., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. https://theses.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-488111769631981/unrestricted/etd.pdf. Levinthal, Dave. 2016. “Journalists Shower Hillary Clinton with Campaign Cash: Far Fewer Making Contri- butions to Donald Trump, Analysis Shows.” Center for Public Integrity, October 18. https://www .publicintegrity.org/2016/10/17/20330/journalists-shower-hillary-clinton-campaign-cash. Luperon, Alberto. 2016. “How the Election Is Actually Rigged.” LawNewz, September 3. http://lawnewz .com/important/how-the-election-is-actually-rigged/. Lutz, Ashley. 2012. “These 6 Corporations Control 90% of the Media in America.” Business Insider, June 14. http://www.businessinsider.com/these-6-corporations-control-90-of-the-media-in-america-2012-6. Lyon, Cody. 2016. “Reforming Electoral College Essential to Saving Democracy.” Huffington Post, Novem- ber 14. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/cody-lyon/reforming-electoral-colle_b_12945032.html. Mann, Brian. 2006. Welcome to the Homeland: A Journey to the Rural Heart of America’s Conservative Revolution. Hanover, NH: Steerforth. Marcotte, Amanda. 2017. “New Election Theory: Did ‘Working-Class Whites’ Switch from Obama to Trump Because the Economy Was Better?” Salon, March 30. http://www.salon.com/2017/03/30/new-election -theory-did-working-class-whites-switch-from-obama-to-trump-because-the-economy-was-better/. Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. (1888) 1969. “Manifesto of the Communist Party.” In Marx/Engels Selected Works. Vol. 1. Translated by Samuel Moore in cooperation with Frederick Engels. Moscow: Progress. https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/index.htm. McCarthy, Andrew C. 2016. “Clinton’s State Department: A RICO Enterprise.” National Review, October 29. http://www.nationalreview.com/article/441573/hillary-clinton-corruption-foundation. McChesney, Robert W. 2015. Rich Media, Poor Democracy: Communication Politics in Dubious Times. New York: New. Media Research Center. 2017. You’re Hired! How NBC Spent 11 Years Making Trump a Household Name, Building Foundation for His Campaign. Reston, VA: Media Research Center. http://www.mrc.org/special-reports /you%E2%80%99re-hired-how-nbc-spent-11-years-making-trump-household-name-building-foundation. Mehra, Bharat. 2015. “Introduction.” Library Trends 64 (2): 179–97. Mehra, Bharat, Bradley Wade Bishop, and Robert P. Partee II. 2016. “Information Science Professionals as Community Action Researchers to Further the Role of Rural Public Libraries in Small Business Eco- nomic Development: A Case Study of Tennessee.” Presented at the annual conference of the Canadian Association for Information Science, Calgary, June 1–3. https://journals.library.ualberta.ca/ojs.cais-acsi .ca/index.php/cais-asci/article/view/966. Mehra, Bharat, Bradley Wade Bishop, and Robert P. Partee II. 2017. “Small Business Perspectives on the Role of Rural Libraries in Economic Development.” Library Quarterly 87 (1): 17–35. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, and Shu-Yueh Lee. 2010. “Perspectives of East Tennessee’s Rural Public Li- brarians about the Need for Professional Library Education: An Exploratory Study.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 51 (3): 142–57. Mehra, Bharat, and Kevin Rioux, eds. 2016. Progressive Community Action: Critical Theory and Social Justice in Library and Information Science. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice. Mehra, Bharat, Kevin Rioux, and Kendra S. Albright. 2009. “Social Justice in Library and Information Sci- ence.” In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences, edited by Marcia J. Bates and Mary Niles Maack. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Mobilization of Rural Libraries • 389Mehra, Bharat, and Vandana Singh. 2017. “Library Leadership-in-Training as Embedded Change Agents to Further Social Justice in Rural Communities: Teaching of Library Management Subjects in the ITRL and ITRL2.” In Teaching for Justice: Implementing Social Justice in the LIS Classroom, edited by Nicole A. Cooke and Miriam E. Sweeney. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice. Michener, James A. 2016. Presidential Lottery: The Reckless Gamble in Our Electoral System. New York: Dial. Middle States Commission on Higher Education. 2003. “Developing Research and Communication Skills: Guidelines for Information Literacy in the Curriculum.” Characteristics of Excellence in Higher Education: Eligibility Requirements and Standards for Accreditation. Philadelphia: Middle States Commission on Higher Education. Mizruchi, Mark S. 2013. The Fracturing of the American Corporate Elite. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Morrow, Brendan. 2016. “2016 Third Presidential Debate Ratings: How Many People Watched?” Heavy, Oc- tober 20. http://heavy.com/news/2016/10/third-presidential-debate-2016-ratings-viewership-numbers -how-many-people-watched-donald-trump-hillary-clinton/. New York Times. 2016. “Election 2016: Million-Dollar Donors in the 2016 Presidential Race.” New York Times, February 9. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/us/elections/top-presidential-donors-campaign -money.html?_r50. Osborne, Samuel. 2016. “Donald Trump Wins: All the Lies, Mistruths and Scare Stories He Told during the US Election Campaign.” Independent, November 9. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world /americas/donald-trump-president-lies-and-mistruths-during-us-election-campaign-a7406821.html. Price, Frederick K. C. 2002. Race, Religion, and Racism. Vol. 2, Perverting the Gospel to Subjugate a People. Santa Monica, CA: Price Ministries. Prior, Markus. 2005. “News vs. Entertainment: How Increasing Media Choice Widens Gaps in Political Knowledge and Turnout.” American Journal of Political Science 49 (3): 577–92. Ratcliffe, Michael, Charlynn Burd, Kelly Holder, and Alison Fields. 2016. “Defining Rural at the U.S. Census Bureau: American Community Survey and Geography Brief.” Brief no. ACSGEO-1. US Census Bureau. https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/reference/ua/Defining_Rural.pdf. Rathge, R. W. 2008. “Rural Demography.” In Encyclopedia of Rural America: The Land and the People. 2nd ed. Edited by Gary A. Goreham. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Reilly, Katie. 2016. “Donald Trump: Here Are All the Times Donald Trump Insulted Mexico.” TIME, Au- gust 31. http://time.com/4473972/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-insult/. Rettig, James, and Susan K. Hagen. 2003. “Stakeholders and Strategies in Information Fluency.” Transforma- tions: Liberal Arts in the Digital Age 1 (1). Risen, Tom. 2016. “Who’s Winning the Election? Networks.” US News & World Report, March 18. https:// www.usnews.com/news/the-report/articles/2016-03-18/forget-trump-and-clinton-cable-news-networks -are-winning-the-2016-election. Rucker, Philip, and Karen Tumulty. 2016. “ ‘He’s a Showbiz Guy’: At Trump’s Political Casting Call, Looks Matter.” Chicago Tribune, December 21. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/politics/ct -trump-cabinet-looks-20161221-story.html. Siegel, Paul N. 2005. The Meek and the Militant: Religion and Power across the World. Chicago: Haymarket. Smith, Warwick. 2014. “Political Donations Corrupt Democracy in Ways You Might Not Realize.” Guardian, September 10. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/11/political-donations-corrupt -democracy-in-ways-you-might-not-realise.
390 • The Library QuarterlyStelter, Brian. 2016. “Debate Breaks Record as Most-Watched in U.S. History.” CNN, September 27. http:// money.cnn.com/2016/09/27/media/debate-ratings-record-viewership/. Taibbi, Matt. 2017. Insane Clown President: Dispatches from the 2016 Circus. New York: Spiegel & Grau. Teachout, Zephyr. 2014. Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s Snuff Box to Citizens United. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Thomas, Zoe. 2016. “US Election 2016: Who’s Funding Trump, Sanders and the Rest?” BBC News, March 17. http://www.bbc.com/news/election-us-2016-35713168. Vinton, Kate. 2016. “These 15 Billionaires Own America’s News Media Companies.” Forbes, June 1. http:// www.forbes.com/sites/katevinton/2016/06/01/these-15-billionaires-own-americas-news-media-companies /#ba6e33130b4b. Wald, Kenneth D., and Allison Calhoun-Brown. 2014. Religion and Politics in the United States. 7th ed. New York: Rowman and Littlefield. Wasserman, David. 2017. “2016 Popular Vote Tracker.” Cook Political Report, January 2. http://cookpolitical .com/story/10174. Willingham, A. J. 2016. “Six Facts to Catch You Up on the Khan Story.” CNN, August 2. http://www.cnn .com/2016/08/02/politics/who-is-khizr-khan-trnd/.Bharat Mehra: associate professor in the School of Information Sciences at the University of Ten- nessee. Mehra’s research focuses on diversity and intercultural communication, social justice in li- brary and information science, critical and cross-cultural studies, and community informatics, or the use of information and communication technologies to empower underserved populations to make meaningful changes in their everyday lives. Mehra has applied action research with racial and ethnic groups; international communities in diaspora; lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender populations; low-income families; rural librarians; small businesses; and others to shape the design and devel- opment of various community-based information systems and services. E-mail: bmehra@utk.edu.