WILLIAM STRAHAN'S AMERICAN BOOK TRADE, 1744-76 ROBERT D. HARLAN THILE EARLIEST recorded sale of books by the London printer Wil- liam Strahan occurred on June 15, 1742, when he sold John Oswald twenty-one "Scots Bibles" valued at ?1 15s.1 On December 1 of that same year he sold John Noon twelve copies of James Fraser's The History of Nadir Shah for ?1 7s.2 Both clients were Lon- don publishers, and Strahan almost ex- clusively restricted his book sale in England to members of that profession. It was not his intention to compete in an auxiliary profession with those men who were his best clients in his primary profession of printing. A printer in eighteenth-century England might legiti- mately sell, trade, and buy books within the bounds of the "trade." For him to attempt to any degree similar transac- tions with the public would mean his ostracism and ruin. Thus, although Strahan's sales through the years were substantial, he never maintained a book- shop and was not known to the English public as a bookseller.3 Beyond the borders of England, Strahan felt less restricted by the pro- fessional rigidity which affected the "trade." The American colonies pro- vided a market where Strahan repre- sented himself as a wholesale and re- tail bookseller. "I likewise sell all sorts of books," he informed Cadwallader Colden in 1744, "so if any of your ac- quaintances want any I shall be obliged if you will direct them to me, in Wine Office Court in Fleet Street."4 Other cor- respondents were solicited, and a direct, personal contact, through David Hall, was established that same year. Hall, a Scots compatriot, friend, and former employee of Strahan, arrived in Phila- delphia that summer; he was to be Ben- jamin Franklin's partner. He was also to be, in effect, Strahan's unofficial agent in America. Strahan had reluctantly indorsed Hall's decision to seek a better life in America. In later, more affluent, years, when his extensive and successful busi- ness could easily have sustained his sons and his friend, Strahan regretted Hall's exodus and his own part in facilitating it. But in 1743 neither man guessed at the remarkable future awaiting Stra- han, and the move seemed advisable for Hall and beneficial for Strahan. Strahan addressed a letter to the Philadelphia printer James Read asking him to find a position for Hall. At that time Read did not need a partner or journeyman, but his cousin, Benjamin Franklin, did. When told about Hall, Franklin wrote Strahan a letter indicating his interest: PHILADe July 10 1743 SIR, Mr. Read has communicated to me part of a Letter from you, recommending a young Man whom you would be glad to see in better Busi- ness than that of a Joumeyman Printer. I have British Museum, Add. MSS 48800, p. 36. 2 Ibid., p. 35. 'William Strahan to David Hall, January 30, 1764 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). ' Cadwallader Colden, The Letters and Papers of Cadwallader Colden (New York: New York His- torical Society, 1920), III, 59. 235
236 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY already three Printing Houses in three differ- ent colonies, and propose to set up a fourth if I can meet with the proper Person to manage it, having all Materials ready for the purpose. If the young Man will venture over hither, that I may see and be acquainted with him, we can treat about the Affair, and I make no doubt but he will think my Proposals reason- able; If we should not agree, I promise him however a Twelve months Good Work, and to defray his Passage back Your humble Servt. unknown. B. FRANKLIN5 "Davie" as Strahan called Hall, ac- cepted Franklin's proposal and was eventually placed in Franklin's printing house in Philadelphia, although not at first as a partner. Hall had not been long in America when Franklin ad- dressed his first inquiry to Strahan concerning the shipment of books from London. It is dated July 4, 1744: I have long wanted a Friend in London whose Judgment I could depend on, to send me from time to time such new Pamphlets as are worth Reading on any Subject (Religious Contro- versy excepted) for there is no depending on Titles and Advertisements. This Favour I take the Freedom to beg of you, and shall lodge Money in your Hands for that purpose.6f Franklin's order of the following year was substantial and inaugurated an as- sociation between the Philadelphia and London firms that was to endure until the American Revolution. "I would not have you be too nice in the choice of Pamphlets you send me," he wrote in an early request. "Let me have every- thing, good or bad, that makes a Noise and has a Run: for I have Friends here of Different Tastes to oblige with the sight of them."7 Franklin further or- dered six sets of Alexander Pope's Works, edited by Bishop William War- burton, and twelve copies of any new poems by James Thomson, whom he greatly admired: "I wish it were in my Power to return him any Part of the Joy he has given me."8 Several other books ordered were for a sale that Franklin was planning. Finally, he re- minded Strahan of his need for some English type from Caslon's foundry.9 Among Strahan's business records and papers, most of which are extant, only his correspondence reveals any in- formation concerning the sale of books to Franklin. Franklin's correspondence refers to some individual orders, and his account book for the period 1739-471O contains figures of the amount of his purchases. Three shipments of "Sun- dries" were received by Franklin from Strahan in 1744; in all, they amounted to ? 63 18s. Id." Orders during the next two years were for goods worth ?136.12 They were Franklin's last regu- lar requests for his shop in Philadelphia, for he advised Strahan that after July, 1747, David Hall would be in charge of the firm.13 Indirectly, Franklin's business rela- tionship with Strahan continued. He held, in fact, the key which opened the door for Strahan to a large American market. Members of his immediate fam- ily were occasional clients, among them his daughter Sally. When in 1755 Strahan asked Franklin to handle the distribution in America of The Gen- tleman's Magazine, Franklin agreed and proposed his daughter should be the mailing agent: 'S. G. W. Benjamin, "Unpublished Letters of Franklin to Strahan," Atlantic Monthly, LXI (January, 1888), 22. 6 Ibid., p. 24. 7Ibid., pp. 22-23. 8 Ibid., p. 23. 9 Ibid. "B enjamin Franklin, Account Book Kept bv Benjamin Franklin, Ledger D 1739-1747 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1929), Vol. II. "Ibid., p. 118. 12Ibid. " Benjamin, op. cit., p. 26.
WILLIAM STRAHAN'S AMERICAN BOOK TRADE 237 I shall be glad to be of any Service to you in the Affair you mention relating to the Gent's Magazine; and our Daughter (who already trades a little in London) is willing to under- take the distributing of them p Post from this Place, hoping it may produce some Profit to herself. I will immediately cause Advertise- ments to be printed in the Papers here, at New York, New Haven and Boston, recommending the Magazine, and proposing to supply all who will subscribe for them at 13s this Currency a year; the Subscribers paying down the Money for one Year beforehand; for otherwise there will be a considerable Loss by bad Debts. As soon as I find what this Subscription will pro- duce, I shall know what Number to send for. Most of those for New England must be sent to Boston. Those for New York, Connecticut, Pensilvania & Maryland, must be sent in to New York or Philadelphia as Opportunities offer to one Place or the other. As to Virginia, I be- lieve it will scarce be worth while to propose it there, the Gentlemen being generally fur- nisht with them by their Correspondents in London. Those who incline to continue, must pay for the second Year three Months before the first expires, and so on from time to time. The Post Masters in those places to take in the subscription money, & distribute the Maga- zines, etc. These are my first Thoughts. I shall write farther.'4 Other clients introduced to Strahan by Franklin were James Parker, Thomas Smith, and Benjamin Mecom. Franklin was at that time a silent part- ner of Parker, whose shop was in New York. Strahan did not receive Parker's first two orders, perhaps (as Franklin suggested) because each was accom- panied by a guinea. In 1748 Franklin again recommended Parker as a cor- respondent for Strahan, noting that Parker was an "honest, punctual Man"15 who would be in a position to sell, and therefore require, many books. A correspondence was established which Strahan was later to regret, for by 1763 Parker was "shamefully behind"'e6 in his payments to Strahan. Thomas Smith, another F1ranklin protege, was established in a shop on the island of Antigua. Characterized by Franklin as ("a very sober, honest and diligent young Man,"'7 he seemed an ideal client for Strahan, particularly since he of- fered an entirely new market. Prospect was replaced by disappointment, and Strahan complained bitterly to David Hall: I have had no Remittance yet from Mr. Smith of Antigua, nor heard from him this 18 Months; but I find he deals with another Book- seller here, from whom he has had several Parcels of Books since he had any from me, and actually paid him for two of them. This is very strange Usage; for surely I had a Right, at least, to be first paid. What he can say for himself I can't divine, but I have wrote to him three Months ago, acquainting him with what I have heard, and desiring he would write to me.18 In an attempt to mitigate Smith's poor conduct, Franklin pointed out the procrastinating behavior of Antiguans, but he did admit that Smith's credit terms were too generous. They were, in fact, his undoing. Smith died insolvent, and Franklin had as little success in collecting from Smith's debtors as Stra- han had in collecting from Smith. Un- daunted, in 1743 Franklin placed his nephew, Benjamin Mecom, in the shop of the late Smith. Again, his recom- mendation to Strahan was strong-"a very honest, indlustrious lad"'19-and 14 Ibid., p. 33. ' Ibid., p. 28. '"William Strahan to David HaIl, July 16, 1763 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophical Society). "Benjamin, op. cit., p. 27. 18 William Strahan to David Hall, February 13, 1750-51 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). '9 Albert H. Smyth (ed.), The Writings of Benja- min Franklin (New Y'ork: Macmillan Co., 1906), III, 142.
238 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY again, on the recommendation of Frank- lin, Strahan accepted another corre- spondent. Within a year Mecom was heavily in debt to Strahan. Strahan wrote disapprovingly to Franklin who cautioned him rather belatedly to ex- tend no more than ?50 in credit. "He is,,, Franklin advised, "a young Lad, quite unacquainted with the World, and, I fear, would be much embarrass'd if he went suddenly into Dealings too deep for his Stock."20 Strahan needed no second warning; he refused any fur- ther shipments to Mecom, preferring to concentrate on extracting payment for books already sent. By 1756 Franklin's second protege in Antigua had failed. Shipping the press and type to Frank- lin, he emigrated to England. The debt to Strahan remained unpaid. Perhaps Strahan's most unpleasant experience with his American book trade came at the hands of James Read, the man who had first suggested to Strahan the possibilities of an Ameri- can market for books and who was also instrumental in securing a position in Philadelphia for David Hall. Strahan quite willingly sent him a large con- signment of books in 1745. Three years later no payments had yet been made. Losing all patience, Strahan decided to initiate legal action. On December 1, 1748, he wrote to Read: "I have by Mr. Wallace sent a Power of Attorney to Mr. Franklin to receive from you what is due me . . . I shall therefore ex- pect that you will pay the Balance to Mr. F. as speedily as you can.2'1 This warning and Franklin's own persuasive- ness seemed, at first, successful, and Franklin wrote Strahan: He agreed to give his Bond, but it had been delay'd from time to time till this Day, when on my Writing to him again to know what Account I should send you, I receiv'd from him the enclosed Billet on which he refused to al- low Interest for the Time past. As he cannot be compell'd to pay Interest on a Book Acct., I desired him then to fill up and Execute the Bond to you after the Principal, and he might settle the Affair of the Interest with you here- after. Accordingly he has just done it, so that Interest will arise for the Time to come; but as he threatens to pay very speedily . . . I hope you will not have much Interest to re- ceive. He has a great many good Qualities for which I love him; but I believe he is as you say, sometimes a little crazy. The Bond is made payable in a Month from the Day; and, for your Encouragement, I may add that not- withstanding what he affects to say of the Bad- ness of his Circumstances I look on the Debt to be far from desperate.22 Franklin's expectations were exces- sive. The bond came due and was not honored. Nor, apparently, did Read ever have any intention of honoring it. Strahan turned next to David Hall, who was Read's brother-in-law, and wrote, on February 13, 1750: "It is very hard I should lie out so much Money for so many Years; and very Strange, that in all this time he had not been able to pay it, or any part of it."213 He further suggested that any alternative scheme which might prove suitable would be acceptable to him, so long as it ended the affair. Hall could devise no appro- priate scheme. In the ensuing years Strahan employed a sea captain, a Philadelphia lawyer, and a Quaker mer- chant; all were equally unsuccessful. It is not difficult to understand why Strahan more and more restricted his -0Ibid., pp. 195-96. ' William Strahan to James Read, December 1, 1748 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). 22 James B. Nolan, Printer Strahan's Book Ac- count (Reading, Pa.: Bar of Berks County, 1939), p. 38. 23 William Strahan to David Hall, February 13, 1750 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society).
WiLLIAM STRAHAN'S AMERICAN BOOK TRADE 239 American trade to "Davie." Hall was his best and most punctual customer in America. He was known personally to Strahan, and that knowledge had pro- duced an admiration and affection which were not diminished by Hall's protracted absence. Strahan treated Hall with a generosity he accorded to no other colonial. "I have," he wrote, "the greatest Inclination for friendship and Gratitude to do everything in my Power that may Promote and enlarge your Business."24 David Hall's business was multifold; he was a printer, newspaper publisher, bookseller, and general merchant. In each of his careers he was assisted ap- preciably by Strahan. Strahan's indorse- ment of Hall had enabled him to find employment with Franklin. The steady supply of printing materials-from presses and type to ink, paper, and com- positor's sticks-facilitated Hall's ca- reer as a printer. When Franklin dis- sociated himself from the Philadelphia firm, Hall became manager of the print- ing house and the publisher of the Pennsylvania Gazette, Franklin's news- paper. With Strahan's assistance he was able to include recent and detailed news from the mother country in the pages of the Gazette, which gave the newspaper an advantage over most of its com- petitors. At a great deal of personal trouble, Strahan convinced newspaper printers in Bristol, Liverpool, and Fal- mouth to send Hall, as often as ships left their ports for Philadelphia, copies of their newspapers. so much consequence to you to be regularly served with them. I have attempted this be- fore, but I never could get them to attend it, they are such careless Fellows.25 He himself supplied the more inti- mate details of London politics. Politics fascinated Strahan, and his close asso- ciation with the London Chronicle en- abled him to accumulate much informa- tion about that subject. Hall had ex- clusive access to this information in America. Fully realizing its value to himself, he was acutely aware of its potential value in the hands of his com- petitors. "I must repeat my request," he wrote Strahan in 1767, "that you will write no Political Letters, or Let- ter of News to any One but myself, for the Reason I gave you before, that they will be turned inito another Channel, and I shall reap no Benefit from them."26 Strahan's reports not only excelled in their detail but also in their clarity. Franklin, who also had access to many of them, perhaps understood their ex- cellence better than Hall. Your accounts are so clear, circumstantial, and complete, that tho' there is nothing too much, nothing is warnting to give us, I imagine, a more perfect knowledge of your publick af- fairs than most people have that live among you. The characters of your speakers and ac- tors are so admirably sketch'd, and their views so plainly opened, that we see and know every- body; they all become of our acquaintance. So excellent a manner of writing seems to me a superfluous gift to a mere printer. If you do not commence author for the benefit of man- kind, you will certainly be found guilty here- after of burying youir talent.27 I have written to the Printers of the Bristol and Liverpool Papers, to send you their latest Papers by every Vessel that sails to Philadel- phia. I hope they will be punctual, as it is of 24 William Strahan to David Hall, February 6, 1749 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). 'William Strahan to David Hall, April 7, 1766 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Penn- sylvania). 2' David Hall to William Strahan, March 31, 1767 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). ' Smyth, op. cit., IV, 245-46.
240 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY An examination of Strahan's many letters to Hall reveals the extensive de- tail with which his reports are filled. The time and care he devoted to writ- ing them attest to his sincere concern for Hall's career. On occasion Strahan procured and passed on to Hall copies of the proceedings of important parlia- mentary debates closed to the public. In these instances, Strahan brought both his influence and his money to bear. And after he had obtained copies of debates, he often annotated them: Herewith I send you, what I promised in my last, Dr. Franklin's examination before the House of Commons, which I have at last pro- cured with great Difficulty, and with some Ex- pense. As it is not very easy, in some parts of it, to comprehend what many of the Questions lead to, or with what intent they were put, I have in the Margin generally inserted the name of the Person who put the Questions, and, where doubtful, whether he was a Friend or an Enemy. I have likewise, at the Bottom of the Pages added here and there a few illustrations, that you and your Friends may the more fully comprehend the whole.28 As a bookseller Hall placed substan- tial orders with Strahan. The records which both Strahan and Hall kept of their transactions are almost completely extant. Strahan's records are less de- tailed than those of Hall, for he listed only the total amount of each order, under the entry "to Books," and the ship on which they were sent and that ship's captain (e.g., "To Books on the Fame, Creighton")). 2 Hall's records are more detailed, listing the number of copies and the titles of each book or- dered. The records reveal an extensive trade. At a time when oceanic transporta- tion was both hazardous and expensive, American buyers preferred placing in- frequent and large orders to frequent and small ones, assuming, perhaps, that large cases were less apt to disappear than small ones. Hall was no exception to this practice. The books he ordered cover every conceivable subject, with law, theology, and belles-lettres pre- dominating. They were destined, gen- erally, for his own shop or for the li- braries for which he was an agent or for individual clients who had placed specific orders with him. The last two groups were by far the most trouble- some for Hall and Strahan; requests from them were often for single copies and for books out of print. Yet they formed an important segment of Hall's business (and, therefore, of Strahan's) and the single-copy orders received the additional attention they demanded. Particularly vexing were the many sub- scriptions to periodical publications: The Gentleman's Magazine, The Lon- don Magazine, The Monthly Review, and others. When certain single num- bers failed to arrive in Philadelphia and the client's series was broken, there were bitter complaints. On one such occasion, Hall lost several customers to a competitor. Hall passed all of these complaints on to Strahan, adding his own to their number. Strahan, sincerely trying to fill Hall's orders satisfactorily, personally supervised the packing of the books and magazines30-doing this at a time when sixty men were working for him, when he no longer even supervised his own 28 William Strahan to David Hall, May 10, 1766 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Penn- sylvania). ' Britislh Museum, Add. MSS 48800, p. 113. 30 William Strahan to David Hall, March 19, 1770 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Penn- sylvania).
WILLIAM STRAHAN'S AMERICAN BOOK TRADE 241 plant, and when he proudly called him- self one of the King's Printers. Hall had the privilege of returning to Strahan most of the books and ma- terials he could not sell, and Strahan made some substantial refunds to him.3' Nearly all law books could be returned because the demand for them was per- manent, and Strahan could easily ex- change them.32 Strahan's terms were generous, and his service, for the time, was excellent. Hall showed his appreciation by paying his bills promptly, even when to do so must have been difficult for him. Dur- ing the crisis in the American colonies provoked by the Stamp Act, he ceased publishing the Pennsylvania Gazette, the source of a large part of his income. Trade declined almost to nothing, and Hall complained that "our People are, in General, so much put to it for Cash, to support their Families in the absolute Necessaries, Trade being at so low an Ebbe, that they really cannot afford to lay out any in the Book Way."'33 He warned Strahan to send absolutely no books but those specifically ordered, and Strahan's previous habit of sending one copy of most new books and an occasional "pretty little Asortment of Pocket Books and Etwees"M34 ceased. In spite of hard times, Hall refused to succumb to the blandishments of other English booksellers. Competition existed for the American trade, and Hall had informed Strahan of instances when other American booksellers received books at cheaper rates than Strahan offered. The cheaper rates had been of- fered to Hall, too. John Oswald, Charles Hitch, John Shuckburgh, and Charles and Edward Dilly quoted cheaper rates on several books, but their competition was only sporadic. Strahan's real nemesis-indeed, the nemesis of all London booksellers-was James Rivington. By 1755 Rivington's audacious practices were the talk of the "trade," among whose members he had few friends and several enemies. When Strahan received news from Hall that Rivington was attempting the same practices in America, he was concerned. Rivington promised a Mr. Hunter in the colonies a 16 per cent discount on all books and a year's credit. Such terms were quite remarkable, and when Hall heard of them, he addressed several pointed queries to 'Strahan. Terming the proposals of Rivington an artifice, Strahan advised Hall that Rivington could not possibly keep to them. Riving- ton's elder brother, the senior partner in the Rivington firm, had made it quite clear that he would not provide books on such terms.35 However, the partner- ship was dissolved the following year, and James Rivington was free to exer- cise his "most low, dirty, and unwar- rantable Methods."36 In 1758 Riving- ton made a concerted attempt to lure Hall away from Strahan. Rivington's prices on books for the American mar- "British Museum, Add. MSS 48800, p. 146. 3'William Strahan to David Hall, February 13, 1750/51 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). 3 David Hall to Hamilton and Balfour, Septem- ber 20, 1766 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophical Society). ' William Strahan to David Hall, July, 1751 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Penn- sylvania). " William Strahan to David Hall, March 3, 1755 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophical Society). " William Strahan to David Hall, July 11, 1758 (David Hall Collectioni, American Philosophical Society).
242 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ket were so much lower than those of his London associates that the latter were amazed at his ability, not only to stay in business, but, apparently, to thrive. Hall felt keenly the competition Rivington's lower prices produced and complained strongly to Strahan. Stra- han, anxious to keep Hall's business and determined not to be defeated by Rivington, whom he thoroughly de- tested, lowered his prices: The Plays and Magazines I have charged at 412 are agreeable to Mr. Rivingtons; tho' they cost me exactly the same in ready Money. Nay there are many Articles charged cheaper than they cost, rather than be outdone by him. 3d for Magazines and Plays is as universal a Charge as a half penny for a half penny Loaf.37 Rivington was declared bankrupt in January, 1760, his debts amounting to the staggering sum of ?30,000. Few in England regretted his decline. The Lon- don booksellers were positively relieved, and complimented themselves that they had heard the last of him. Their con- gratulations were premature. The phoe- nix rose again; Rivington appeared sud- denly in New York City, accompanied by a large assortment of books and boasting of a substantial amount of credit in London. He announced to the booksellers of the New World that they had been universally robbed by the booksellers of the Old World and that only he knew how to deal with them. To prove his point, he charged low prices on several books-prices which his competitors in the colonies could not match. Hall, who found the close geographical proximity of an old antag- onist alarming, wrote Strahan for ad- vice and assistance. Strahan's answer was optimistic: "But take my Word for it you have no Reason to be afraid of him, for the cheaper he sells . . . the shorter his Career must be. His race with you will soon be run."38 Events did not soon substantiate his prediction. Rivington's business in New York City did so well he opened a second shop in Philadelphia. He took away several of Hall's clients and caused Hall a great deal of anxiety. Not until 1767 did Riv- ington's erratic business methods catch up with him. Severe reverses forced him to close the Philadelphia shop,39 much to Hall's delight, and Rivington re- turned, somewhat chastened, to New York City. By this time Hall fully agreed with Strahan's judgment of Riv- ington: "Of all the men I ever knew I think he is the very worst."40 Another of Strahan's competitors in the American book trade was the Scots- man, Alexander Donaldson, whose low prices had also tempted Hall. "I have been a good deal sollicited in favour of one Mr. Donaldson," Hall advised Strahan, "and from whom I received a letter lately. . . . He proposes selling considerably lower than I can have from any other."41 Strahan advised Hall that Donaldson's books were as inferior in quality as they were low in price: He is upon the Pyratical Scheme, and has printed a good Many Books in a cheap Manner, by reducing their Size from 4to to 8"' or from 8v? to 12mo but in general so wretchedly in- ' William Strahan to David Hall, December 17, 1759 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). 'William Strahan to David Hall, February 26, 1761 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). 3 William Strahan to David Hall, October 9, 1767 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). 40 William Strahan to David Hall, February 26, 1761 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). "David Hall to William Strahan, Septmber 25, 1764 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society).
WILLIAM STRAHAN'S AMERICAN BOOK TRADE 243 correct and on such indifferent Paper that Gentlemen are much disgusted at them when they see them; so that his Trade is dwindling fast.42 Strahan concluded his indictment of Donaldson's character with a charge he knew would completely convict the man in Hall's mind: "He is the Rivington of Scotland."43 David Hall died in 1772. He had been Strahan's best colonial client and certainly his most reliable one. From 1760 to 1772, books and printing ma- terial valued at ?18,000 had been sent to him by Strahan,"44 and had been paid for. In writing a letter of condolence to William Hall, Strahan eulogized that young man's father: In his Youth, he had none of the Levity so common to that Stage of Life; Yet he was aboundantly chearful, easy, and social. His In- dustry was constant and universal; and his Oeconomy, even when his Means of Substance were extremely slender, was such as enabled him always to indulge his ardent Desire to do every body strict Justice. His Behaviour to his Parents, too, who were in his early Days both in Years and Fortune very much upon the Decline, were remarkably dutiful and affec- tionate, sharing with them the small Pittance he was allowed for Board wages during his Apprenticeship. In short, in my whole Life, and among my whole Friends and Acquaint- ance, which are not few, I never knew a Char- acter more uniformly upright, steady, and per- severing in a Rectitude of Conduct, which nothing could ever prevail on him to deviate from. This is a just Picture of him before he left Britain, which is farther verified and con- firned by his subsequent Behaviour through Life.45 When David Hall died, he was in debt to Strahan. The debt was paid, in part, but then augmented by further shipments of goods to the son, William, who had inherited the firm. The son, however, did not inherit the father's habit of punctuality. Strahan was not at first alarmed. But when several polite inquiries went unanswered, he finally wrote Franklin asking him about the status of the Hall famnily. Franklin's response, that the Halls were thriving, made the debt even more disagreeable. Strahan even wrote David Hall's widow, unsuccessfully requesting her to inter- cede.46 To Franklin he complained: You wrote me in a late Letter that Mr. Hall's family was all well and that Trade was as brisk with them as ever. Since that is the Case, I very much wonder I have not heard from young Mr. Hall these three years past; he has not remitted any part of the balance then due to me which is 1363:10:11 tho' I have written to him again and again to remind him of it. You well-know, that his honest Father would not have acted thus, and that no Situation of public affairs would have pre- vented him from faithfully discharging his just Debts. If you can, with any Propriety inter- pose in this Matter, I should be much obliged to you to mention this in your next Letter, or to put me in the proper way to recover this Debt.47 Franklin was of no assistance. Deeply involved in the preservation of the emerging American nation, of which he knew Strahan did not approve, he had little time for such trifles. The chaos of revolution protected William Hall from any stringent action on Strahan's part. Strahan's trade with the New World ceased, and, when peace came, it was t William Strahan to David Hall, November 30, 1764 (David Hall Collection, American Philosophi- cal Society). 0Ibid. " British Museum, Add. MSS 48800, pp. 113, 129, 145, 146, 149. "William Strahan to William Hall, March 3, 1773 (David Hall Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania). ' William Strahan to Mrs. David Hall, April 7, 1778 (David Hall Collection, Historical Socety of Pennsylvania). I7 Wiiam Strahan to Benjamin Franklin, July 14, 1778 (Benjamin Franklin Papers, American Philosophical Society).
244 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY not renewed. Franklin assured Strahan in 1784 that the independence of Amer- ica would not alter adversely the book trade with England. He was, on the contrary, optimistic and observed that " a vast audience is assembling there for English Authors, present and future, our People .doubling every twenty years; and this will demand large and of course profitable impressions of your most valuable Books."48 Franklin gauged the demand for books correctly but not the source which would meet it: "American publishing activities had rapidly expanded, and nationalistic sentiment encouraged publishing at home rather than in England."49 To Strahan it did not matter. The death of his friend, David Hall, and the in- gratitude of Hall's son, William, caused him to lose interest and heart in the American book trade. I Smyth, op. cit., IX, 263. IL. H. Butterfield, "The American Interests of the Firm of E. and C. Dilly, with Their Letters to Benjamin Rush, 1770-1795," Papers of the Bib- liographical Society of America, XLV (1951), 297.