Volume 37 JULY 1967 Number 3 THE UDC AND FID-A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE W. BOYD RAYWARD I T HE outlines of the history of the Federation International de Do- cumentation (FID) are fairly well known. Excellent historical and factual, though rather summary, accounts of the growth of the organization from 1895, when it was created in Brussels by Otlet and La Fontaine as the Institut Inter- national de Bibliographie (IIB), and of its nature are given by Scott,' Murra,2 and Pafford.' More colored accounts of aspects of it may be had from Brad- ford4 and Metcalfe.5 Very generally, the history of the organization is a sequence of expansions and contractions, of structural adjustments by which, de- spite two world wars, a long period of English indifference,6 and American suspicion,' it was able to survive as an important international bibliographic force. The institutional history of FID is more than its several changes of name, although they are important as reflect- ing attempts to strike a balance be- tween centralization and regionalism, between nationalism and international- ism. Other important issues that need ' Edith Scott, "IFLA and FID-History and Programs," Library Quarterly (January, 1962), 22:1-18. 2Katherine 0. Murra, "Some Attempts to Or- ganize Bibliography Internationally," in Jesse Shera and Margaret Egan (eds.), Bibliographic Organization: Papers Presented before the 15th An- nual Conference of the Graduate Library School (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951), pp. 24-53. 'J. H. P. Pafford, Library Cooperation in Europe (London: Library Association, 1934), pp. 310-18. 'S. C. Bradford, "Fifty Years of Documenta- tion," in Documentation, with an Introduction by Jesse H. Shera and Margaret E. Egan (2d ed.; London: Crosby & Lockwood, 1953), chap. viii. (First published as BSIB Proceedings [1945], 7:43- 51.) 'J. W. Metcalfe, Subject Classifying and Index- ing of Libraries and Literature (Sydney: Angus & Robertson, 1959), pp. 141-62. " It was not until the formation in 1927 of the British Society for International Bibliography (BSIB) as the English branch of IIB under Pollard and Bradford, enthusiastic advocates of IIB and UDC, that "documentation" became significant in England. 'As early as 1900, R. R. Bowker felt compelled to report to his American colleagues upon a visit he made in 1899 to IIB in order to reassure them that it was really a practical and working institu- tion. ("Institut International de Bibliographie," Library Journal [June, 1900], 25:273-74.) The negotiations of IIB with ALA over the fate of the RBU, tentative as early as 1916 (see Library Jour- nal [May, 1916], 41:314 and [June, 1916], 41:408), but really getting under way only in the twenties, make dismal reading. (See generally E. C. Richard- son, Some Aspects of International Library Co- operation [Yardley, Penn.: F. S. Cook & Son, 1928], and in it especially "The Brussels Institute Again . .. p," pp. 145-56.) 259
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY greater probing are the nature and ex- tent of FID's dependence on the ener- gies and finances of individuals such as the founding fathers, Otlet, La Fon- taine, and, by justifiable extension, Donker Duyvis, and men such as Rich- ardson, Pollard, and Bradford in Amer- ica and England, and similar enthusi- asts in France and Germany; the nature and effect of FID's relations with the League of Nations and with the inter- national organization set up to develop the Royal Society's international scien- tific catalog;8 and the attempts made to change the nature of what might be called FID's international warrant,9 to mention no others. One of the reasons ,for further study of FID is the develop- ment around it of the Mundaneum10 in Brussels that, as an a-political "little League of Nations," for a while inter- estingly paralleled the greater body in Geneva, to say nothing of the passion- ate and creative involvement of Otlet and La Fontaine in both. FID as an international organization must be studied as an international bibliographic organization. It has to be examined with reference to its purposes and programs and their relation to those of other bibliographic organizations. These organizations include the Library Association, Aslib, the American Li- brary Association, IFLA, the affiliated institutes in Brussels itself, in Paris, Zurich, and elsewhere, and later the affiliated national societies such as the British Society for International Bibli- ography (BSIB) and the American Documentation Institute. As a biblio- graphic organization, FID has usually been described accurately and objec- tively as far as the descriptions go, but not so well as it deserves. The Reper- toire Bibliographique Universel (RBU), that immense, dinosaurian card catalog of world literature1' (and the other equally extinct catalogs12) that devel- oped variously to the wonder and be- wilderment of the rest of the world at the offices of the IIB in Brussels, to- gether with the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), in particular de- serve attention; the one as an awful and pertinent warning that a new tech- nology might not secure the biblio- graphical millennium, the other because of its continuing existence and use. But a full understanding of both these bib- liographic phenomena is dependent up- on a realization that they are character- istic of their times, and this demands 8 See, for example, Paul Otlet, "Le Catalogue International de la litterature Scientifique," IIB Bulictin (1902), pp. 203-9; and S. C. Bradford's suggestion that the regional organization developed for this catalog interfered with the development of a similar organization for the IIB (Bradford, op. cit. [n. 4 above], p. 137). 'For example, the attempts to organize a "docu- mentary federation of governments" begun in 1908 and still in Otlet's mind in 1930. (See "Conference Internationale de Documentation, Bruxelles, 1908. Compte Rendu Analytique. Annexe I," IIB Bulle- tin [1908], pp. 205-8, 211-13; Paul Otlet, "Rapport du secretariat general, 14e Conference Interna- tionale de l'IIB, Zurich, 1930," Documentatio Uni- versalis [1931], pp. 38-39.) 10 A brief explanation of the Mundaneum is given by F. Donker Duyvis in his obituaries on La Fontaine (FID Communicationes [1943], 10:23- 25) and Otlet (FID Communicationes [1945], 12:17-18). Another account is contained in Paul Otlet, Traite de documentation (Brussels: Editiones Mundaneum Pollais Mondial, 1934), pp. 407-9, and in Documents I and II of the Annexe to it. " For an early explanation, see IIB, Manuel du repertoire bibliographique universel (Brussels, 1905), pp. 18-19; and for one of the latest explana- tions, see Otlet, Traite de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above), pp. 404-6. " For accounts of these, see IIB, "La documenta- tion et l'iconographie" (esp. II, "Notices et regles pour la formation du repertoire iconographique universel"), IIB Bulletin (1906), pp. 30-45; "Le Muse6 International de la presse (Section de l'IIB et Section du Music International). Programme et organization," IIB Bulletin (1910), pp. 285-91.
THE UDC AND FID 261 a closer and more intensive historical study than is normally given to FID. A full-scale history is not possible here, but FID could be shown as a bibliographic organization gradually and almost involuntarily precipitated from its immediate historical context. A European and a more general back- ground would help more precisely to identify and determine the significance of the individual and institutional de- cisions by which FID was created and developed. The ready acceptance in, at least, the French-speaking parts of Europe of the hydra-headed biblio- graphic monster would need to take into account the proposals of Jullien," Dan- jou,14 and Van der Haeghen.'5 The more general background would be in terms of a widespread, intense preoccu- pation in Europe as well as in England and America, with the idea of universal bibliography.'6 Near the end of the nineteenth century was added the ideal of international subject bibliography examined not only by internationally oriented learned societies'7 but even by government.'8 The general purpose of this paper is to provide an approach to the kind of historical study described above by ex- amining UDC in a number of different but "historical" ways. The importance of FID lies in its being the major im- petus for the development of a true bibliographic internationalism, embody- ing and explicitly encouraging the de- velopment of a new concept of biblio- graphic organization called documenta- tion. UDC was developed as a tool of European documentation by Otlet and La Fontaine and others. Initially, docu- mentation was a rationalization of IIB, and its work provided a theoretical base for it. UDC, as well as IIB or FID, needs to be studied in the knowledge of that theory. Usually UDC is consid- ered basically apart from IIB, but that it could have been structurally affected by this origin is little realized. Specifi- cally, then, this article aims to provide a brief exposition of the theory of docu- mentation as developed by Otlet and others in relation to IIB, the RBU, and UDC. It will then consider some of the problems historically presented by UDC and provide a new kind of histor- ical perspective for them. All of this will reflect back upon FID itself in a greater awareness of the complexities involved in dealing with it and of the nature, scope, and difficulties presented by the bibliographic problem generally. 13 D. J. Foskett, Science, Hutmanism, and Li- braries (New York: Hafner, 1964), chap. vii. 1 W. E. A. Axon, "Danjou's Scheme of Universal Bibliography," Library Journal (1880), 5:205-6. 15 "Project for a General Catalogue of French Libraries," Library Journal (1894), 19:334-36. (Translation of an article in the Revue Bleu [August 4, 1894], over the initials "R. R.") l6 For an account of English attempts at a Uni- versal Bibliography, see W. Boyd Rayward, "To- wards a History of Systematic Bibliography in England, 1850-1895" (Occasional Paper No. 82 [Urbana: University of Illinois, in press]). 17 The Royal Society is the most famous of these, but in England the Society of Arts and the Biblio- graphical Society (in its formative years) cannot be neglected. In America, as early as 1883, the American Association for the Advancement of Sci- ence set up a committee to consider the indexing of the literature of the chemical elements. (Library Journal [Jan., 1885], 10:8). Nor should the bodies that produced the Engineering Index and Poole's Index and the ALA Index be ignored here. 18 The U.S. Signal Service prepared an interna- tional bibliography of meteorology ("A Bibliog- raphy of Science," Library Journal [1888], 13:377- 78. Reprinted from Science [Sept. 21, 1888]); the U.S. Patent Office had a considerable program of indexing (see Howard L. Prince, "Patent Office In- dexing," Library Journal [1891], 16:234-37). Above all, there was the Index Catalogue of the U.S. Surgeon-General's Library (Billings's Cata- logue), a fascicule of which appeared as early as 1876.
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY II In defining the work of IIB, Schnei- der observes that it "desires primarily to serve documentation, that is to say, to combine organically by means of 'graphic' marks all things that deal with one subject, one thought, one thing, or one impression, regardless whether these be books, pictures, or musical scores."'9 This is reminiscent of the opening of one of the first important statements of a "theory" of documentation: "By documentation is meant to-day the put- ting to use of all of the written or graph- ic sources of our knowledge, such as are constituted by documents of all kinds, especially printed texts. These documents comprise all of that which represents or expresses, with the help of whatsoever signs (writing, pictures, diagrams, symbols) an object, an event, or an impression." In this view docu- mentation is considered explicitly as the complement of other methods of investi- gation: observation, experimentation, and deduction. "Supported by an inte- grated and timely documentation (li- braries and collections), helped by in- struments of research (bibliographies), exercised according to rational and re- flective processes (criticism of sources) the documentary method permits true- ly the collaborative assistance of all who have worked previously on the same questions."20 In the early theorizing of Otlet (many statements appearing in the early publications of IIB are unsigned, but probably written by him, perhaps with collaboration from La Fontaine), documentation was intimately linked with IIB, the RBU, and UDC, every- thing flowing ultimately from or to the repertory. This theorizing has two im- portant aspects. The one relates to the systematic and worldwide organization of graphic materials, irrespective of form, through universal co-operation for unification of methods; and the other relates to a tendency to locate primacy of bibliographical concern in the literatures of science and technol- ogy. In the first case, institutional limi- tations to bibliographic organization (such as are inevitable in libraries and similar "focused" institutions) were to be completely transcended. The RBU, on the one hand, would provide the rallying point for documentary work anywhere, and the UDC, on the other, would present a general scientific tool for achievement of the much-desired in- ternationalization of methods and gen- eral standardization of results. In the second case, one can only describe a tendency, for, strictly, documentation was to be neither materials nor subject limited. Rather it was to provide an organized system which would mediate between the public and documents on all matters whether scientific, technical, historical, social, or industrial. Never- theless, and especially, "The word 'documentation' expresses a function such as that which must satisfy sci- entific and technical writing. Transfor- mations may occur in the book, or modifications may befall the internal arrangement of organizations charged with its conservation and distribution. That which is most important, that which remains permanently, is the ne- cessity for rapid, complete, up-to-date " Georg Schneider, Theory and History of Bib- liography, trans. Ralph Shaw (New York: Scare- crow Press, 1934), p. 284. '2 Paul Otlet, "La documentation," in "L'organi- zation systematique de la documentation et le developpement de I'Institut International de Bi- bliographie," IIB Publication (1907), No. 82, pp. 7-15.
THE UDC AND FID 263 information . . . that is, the need for documentation."2' One might argue that it was prima- rily the difficulty of obtaining informa- tion from scientific and technical liter- ature that initiated the bibliographic movement of which documentation was part. If documentation, with its em- phasis on real information and only incidentally on bibliographic informa- tion, could adequately cope with this material, it could cope with any. Otlet, though constantly arguing a special theory of documentation, in the thirties apparently became convinced of the need for a more generalized theory. Initially, IIB was set up very definitely and was heartily applauded for this by Francis Campbell of the British Museum, himself a neglected but forward-looking student of bibliog- raphy, as "an exclusively scientific as- sociation 222 which was to devote itself to the scientific study of bibliography. "It is high time," wrote Campbell, "for the institution of such an association ... confusion of tongues is bad enough, but confusion of books is worse."23 For him, what most recommended the IIB as distinct from the Royal Society's enterprise, begun at the same time, was its attempt to deal with literature as a whole according to a rationalized and systematic plan on a worldwide basis. The science lay in the plan. Al- most forty years after the founding of the "exclusively scientific association," Otlet attempted to transcend the ration- alization of the particular that charac- terized his theorizing to that date. He attempted rigorously and logically to elaborate in precise terminology a gen- eral theory of documentation that would have an organization and devel- opment as close, lucid, and self-sustain- ing as any mathematical or scientific exposition. Such a theory considers documentation as a social phenomenon and attempts to set it as firmly as pos- sible in epistemology. "We need now not only bibliography, the description of books, but bibliology, that is to say, a general science and technology of the document."24 The Traite25 and the Systematique are extraordinary documents, apparent- ly never available in English. The near- est approach to their theorizing is that of Shera and Egan in the various papers culminating in "Foundations of a The- ory of Bibliography,"26 and the intro- duction to Bradford's Documentation.27 The former makes a plea for a new kind of social epistemology. On the Conti- nent some attempt was made to con- tinue the conceptual development and refinement of documentation brought to such a high point by Otlet.28 Most ideas about documentation, however, subse- 21 Henri La Fontaine and Paul Otlet, "L'Etat actuel de questions bibliographiques et l'organiza- tion internationale de Ia documentation," IIB Bulletin (1908), p. 185. "I.I.B. actes officiels: statuts, article L." Re- printed in Manuel de repertoire bibliograpkique universel (Brussels: 1905), p. 37. 3 F. B. Campbell, "L'Institut International de Bibliographie," The Library (1895), 7:342. 2Paul Otlet, "La systematique de la documenta- tion," Documentatio universalis "Annexe" (1932), p. 272. 'Otlet, Traite' de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above). 'Margaret Egan and Jesse Shera, "Foundations of a Theory of Bibliography," Library Quarterly (April, 1952), 22:125-37. ' Jesse Shera and Margaret Egan, "A Review of the Present State of Librarianship and Docu- mentation," in Bradford, Documentation, op. cit. (n. 4 above), pp. 11-45. ' See, for example, G. A. Von Riemsdijk, "Bi- bliographie et documentation. Essai de definition de ces idWes," FID Communicationes (1941), 8:27-32; and Robert Pages, "Transformations documentaires et milieu cultural (Essai de documentologie)," Re- view of Documentation (1948), 15:53-64.
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY quently expressed a kind of anachro- nistic pragmatism and identified the "discipline" with a number of biases im- plicit in its earliest and most "shocking" form-with its relation to science and technology and its bypassing or self- conscious eschewal of traditional library techniques, on the one hand, and on the other, with UDC. Lancaster-Jones recognizes the gen- eral vagueness of usage of "documenta- tion," but observes that the word is usu- ally employed "in regard to the tech- nical literature."29 Libraries, in his view, are mainly wedded to the bibliographi- cal "notice," the technologist demand- ing more sophisticated service. Pages,30 in his zeal for documentation Otlet- style, appears anxious for the inevitable decline of libraries with their pernicious book-orientation. In their stead he sees rising up "documentotheques," of which libraries will become but parts, "an- nexes." For Bradford, documentation is simply UDC and documentary clas- sification by UDC. Indeed, he can calm- ly describe the origins of documentation in Otlet and La Fontaine's realization that "technical material as well as sci- entific needed, not merely to be cata- logued and abstracted, but also classi- fied by subject so that information on a special topic could be found."3 III Of all the contributions of FID to the world of learning, UDC may prove the most permanent and the most sig- nificant, perhaps because whatever its congenital defects and characteristics, it was developed to become all but fi- nancially and administratively inde- peindent of its source. Certainly its users and its uses are extraordinarily numer- ous and varied. Many of them, while largely indifferent or unrelated to con- cepts of organization for effective glob- al documentation, nevertheless con- tributed to the financial stability of an otherwise precarious venture.32 In 1911 the list of institutions and individuals co-operating with IIB in matters of documentation (simply as members, or by using UDC or other common meth- ods-so broadly interpreted as to be almost meaningless) filled sixty octavo pages of one of the Institut's publica- tions.33 By 1951 the list of institutional users of UDC alone filled over thirty small quarto pages and included more than one thousand institutions. By that time there were also over 400 publica- tions using UDC either for the classifi- cation of articles or of bibliographical data.3 The system was suggested as suitable for an enormously diverse range of tasks and was actually used in many of them. Pollard suggests its value in the "cataloguing" of photo- graphs, collections of coins, and collec- tion of microscopic slides.35 It was used for the classification of correspondence '2E. Lancaster-Jones, "Technical Libraries and Documentation," FID 15th Confercnce, 1939, Pro- ceedings, p. c16. 30 Pages, op. cit. (n. 28 above). 31 S. C. Bradford, "Fifty Years of Documeiita- tion," op. cit. (n. 4 above), p. 132. 32 FID, "Outline of a Long-Term Policy of the International Federation for Documentation," FID Publicationz No. 325 (1960), p. 27. 33"Liste de la cooperation international en mati&res de bibliographie et de documentation: institutions, collectivities et particuliers . . . ," IIB Publication No. 116 (1911). 34 "List of UDC Users," FID Publication No. 258 (1951). "A. F. C. Pollard, The Decimal Bibliographic Classification of the Institut International de Bi- bliographie, Partly Translated for the Formation and Use of a Universal Bibliographic Repertory Concernting Optics, Light, and Cognate Subjects (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1926), p. 4.
THE UDC AND FID 265 files, patents, archives, to provide a flex- ible system for intercalation of pages, especially in loose-leaf reference books, for accounts (in 1904 over thirty tram- way companies had adopted such a scheme), for the arrangement of glos- saries, and so on.36 The particular editions of the work over the years testify to its wide inter- national use. Portions of eight complete editions have been published in five lan- guages up to 1961. Partial editions may be explained on the grounds of cost, the size of the fully-extended work, and the irrelevance of most of it to special- ists only interested in a fragment of the whole. The first edition (French) ap- peared as the Manuel du Re'pertoire Bibliographique Universel. The second (French) and third (German) editions were complete, but the later editions (English, French, Japanese, Spanish, and German) are all incomplete. In the period 1938-61 abridged editions ap- peared in thirteen languages together with an abridged trilingual edition in 1958. Many editions of special parts and selected or excerpted editions have appeared.37 Because of such considerable and in- ternational use, UDC has been subject- ed to continuous critical scrutiny. A range of these criticisms suggests con- tinuing difficulties in the classification for both students of classification and for librarians and other daily users. Many of the most characteristic and perhaps controversial aspects of the classification relate it through Otlet's vision of a documentary utopia to a par- ticular European philosophical tradi- tion. Explanations and criticisms have hardly taken this into account. But it is necessary to ask first: What is UDC? How has it been described? Xhat are its characteristic features? Though the classification has natu- rally evolved with the passage of time, it has remained, basically, structurally, the same; one of the earliest English descriptions remains one of the best. In 1926 Pollard published a translation of part of the Manuel du Repcrtoire Bi- bliographique Universel to serve as a guide to his Decimal Index of the Transactions of the Optical Society of which he was then secretary. In his de- finitive introduction he wrote: The decimal bibliographic classification of the Institut International de Bibliographie con- sists of a most systematic table of subjects in which knowledge is bibliographically but not philosophically classed, with as much logical or- der as possible, proceeding from the general to the particular, from the whole to the part, from the genus to the species. Each subject in this table is represented by a decimal number composed of one or more fig- ures according to the degree of generality. These numbers are decimal in the sense that each figure towards the right does not modify the actual value of the preceding figures, but corresponds to a subdivision of the subject rep- resented by them. The order in which the fig- ures follow one another is thus the decimal or- der. Certain groups of numbers distinguished by special signs, when combined with the simple decimal numbers and with one another to form compound numbers, enable multifarious and various notions to be represented. The signs are given a definite succession or- der so that the compound numbers may be filed in definite order with the simple numbers. The whole classification is completed by an alpha- betical index of subjects with their correspond- ing decimal numbers. By indexing documents, or even objects which are not of a bibliograph- ical nature, with the classification numbers, col- lections can be made, ranged in methodical or- S A. F. C. Pollard, "Documentary Uses of Decimal Numbers," BSIB Proceedings (1941), 3:15-25. 37 FID, Universal Decimal Classification (BS1000A) (34th rev. ed.; London: British Stand- ards Institute, 1961). (The various editions are listed at the end.)
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY der and capable of receiving increments and intercalations.38 For Pollard, the unique and most valuable features of UDC are its signs and auxiliary numbers, for these "and their appropriate decimal groups, by association with the simple decimal numbers, convert the restricted and im- perfect Dewey decimal system into a powerful tool of bibliographical re- search worthy of universal recogni- tion."39 But UDC as well as being all this is, in fact, "no less than a method for expressing notions of the mind in figures, which are independent of lan- guage, understood by all, and have a definite and easily found position in any collection of material, however great."40 Two contemporary statements ampli- fy Pollard's description and confirm his emphases. The 1960 policy statement of FID, while disavowing UDC as its primary and exclusive concern, stresses that it remains one of the most compre- hensive of classifications, has been pub- lished in a number of languages, and is kept systematically up to date and de- veloped by a large staff of scientific specialists. "U.D.C. is in fact one of the few comprehensive intellectual stand- ards in existence. It attempts to cover all variations of view, and promotes multiple approach to subject matter," even though this leads at times to com- plexity, clumsiness, and superfluity.4 In the British Standards Institute (BSI) English edition of UDC, it is described as a universal classification in that an attempt is made to include in it every field of knowledge, not as a patchwork of isolated, self-sufficient groupings, but as an integrated pattern of cor- related subjects. . . . The U.D.C. is essentially a practical system for numerically coding infor- mation, so designed that any idea, once coded in a field correctly, can be readily found from whatever angle it is sought. It should not be regarded as a philosophical classification of knowledge, nor is the order of subjects of pri- mary importance. . . . The introduction of an auxiliary apparatus of connection and related signs, lacking in the original Dewey system, has made U.D.C. really universal.42 Jesse Shera has taken exception to these judgments of UDC. He concludes that those characteristic features so highly praised by some are really weak- nesses. "The Universal Decimal (Clas- sification) was of course derived from Dewey, but its makers strove to achieve added dimensions, depth and flexibility by the use of certain signs of association to indicate relationships and points of view. The result was not improvement but greater complexity and serious magnification of the weaknesses inher- ent in the parent scheme."43 He goes on to remark that the rapidly growing vol- ume of graphic records, that which was responsible in a sense for UDC in the first place, is making "traditional li- brary classifications hopelessly inade- quate."44 One should stress, of course, that UDC was never conceived or in- tended as a "traditional library," but as a "documentary" classification. Never- theless, problems arise from the use of the auxiliary tables and the signs of association. The 1961 BSI edition rec- ognizes a process of their "hiding" in- formation. Metcalfe45 is strongly criti- cal of this tendency. One can only 38 Pollard, "The Decimal Bibliographic Classifi- cation . . . ," op. cit. (n. 35 above), pp. 12-13. 39Ibid., p. 4. 40 Ibid. 41 FID, "Outline of a Long-Term Policy State- ment . .. .," op. cit. (n. 32 above), p. 27. 42FID, Universal Decimal Classification (BS1OOOA), op. cit. (n. 37 above), p. 6. 'uJesse Shera, "Classification," in Shera and Egan (eds.), op. cit. (n. 2 above), p. 79. 44 Ibid. 45 Metcalfe, op. cit. (n. 5 above), chap. x.
THE UDC AND FID 267 approach a subject from different points of view, different angles, if, firstly, all these approaches are provided for in a number, and if classification can occur by the successive recombined elements of that number. The auxiliary tables, with their signs of association, actually fix the order of elements and thereby reduce their capacity for reversal and recombination. The difficulty is one arising from a confusion between sub- ject indication, on the one hand, and a tendency in the classification, on the other, to encourage document codifica- tion, the one being limited and ham- pered by the other. This attempt to create a notation for UDC that would, in Otlet's phrase, express "all shades of ideologico-bibliographical analysis," of a document brings UDC in Metcalfe's mind into the same category as ana- lytico-synthetic classifications, of which Ranganathan's Colon Classification (CC) is typical and, to Metcalfe, anath- ema. Ranganathan, himself, finds consid- erable fault with UDC essentially be- cauSe it is not CC. While not doing full justice to the historical background of UDC, he observes that by 1937, when the World Congress of Universal Doc- umentation met in Paris, "D.C. was still able to negotiate . . . the specific subjects that got embodied in books, and the library profession did not prac- tice documentation work to any great extent. But in the field of documenta- tion, the faults of the D.C. are now handicapping the U.D.C.... The D.C. core of the U.D.C. has at present be- come too decrepit to stand the pressure even of books and still less, therefore, of documentation."'6 The inadequacies cited against UDC, when it is compared with CC, have a sonorous but unintel- ligible sound. It does not, for example, have the capacity to "impregnate the digits with the deeper unscheduled mnemonic quality . . . as freely as the C .C. ' 47 The criticisms of Metcalfe, Ranga- nathan, and Shera against the "D.C. core" (a rather misleading concept even though UDC initially derived from DC)48 are of a certain kind. They re- late to the philosophy or systematics of classification in general. They are also, in a sense, criticisms of outsiders taking some kind of overview of the system. More concrete criticism tends to come from within the ranks of UDC users themselves. This deals with the classi- fication itself, its present subdivisions, their inadequate specifications, and the illogical or erroneous conjunctions they present. One might say that the first kind of criticism is more closely related to bibliographical application of the classification, and the second to the der- ivation of the classification in the sys- tematics of science and other kinds of 46S. R. Ranganathan, "Classification and Inter- national Documentation," Review of Docuimenta- tion (1947), 14:164. 47 Ibid. 48 Bradford, for example, states that UDC is "nine times as extensive as the Dewey Code" and instances organic chemistry as showing the sorts of development typically occurring in UDC. It has two thousand entries compared with twenty in Dewey. (See "Universal Decimal Classification," in his Documentation, op. cit. [n. 4 above], p. 79). One should, of course, on the other side, also note the attempts made to gain correspondence between DC and UDC at least to the first three places. Bradford was one of a committee of FID which had "fruitful conversation" with Dr. Godfrey Dewey on this matter. (See F. Donker Duyvis, "Report of the International Committee of Uni- versal Classification," in FID, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference, 1934, pp. c104-8.) The mat- ter was still of interest as recently as 1960. (See G. A. Lloyd, "Comparison of the Dewey and Uni- versal Decimal Classifications at a Minimum 3- Figure Level," FID Publication 329 [The Hague: FID, 1960]).
2 68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY knowledge. The scientific specialists working on the revisions, extensions, and improvements of UDC are not con- cerned with the auxiliary schedules or with their use in relation to the main tables in order to obtain the greatest possible degree of bibliographical spec- ificity but with the elaboration and re- lation of subjects in the main tables themselves. The problems they encoun- ter there are mainly "subject" prob- lems; but they inevitably lead to the more basic awareness of the difficulties of extending and changing the notation of the main tables to permit intercala- tion of new subjects and rearrangements of the old. At the same time Ranganathan was formulating what might be thought bas- ic criticisms of UDC as both a biblio- graphic classification and one necessar- ily attempting to reflect the organiza- tion of knowledge, Scholten, an "insid- er," was considering the latter aspect very closely from the point of view of the iuture development of the classifi- cation. His observations and conclu- sions are very interesting, the latter be- ing similar to those of Ranganathan. When subjected to close logical scrutiny and confronted with the development of science and technology, the order of the main divisions is illogical, he concluded, and parts of the classification have been wrongly developed or are now clearly antiquated. But he recognizes the enor- mous difficulty of holding in balance the need to adjust the classification fre- quently so that "it follows the trend of changing knowledge but becomes diffi- cult to use," and the need to hold the classification fairly stable so that it can act as a standard, but thereby becomes "antiquated and for that reason difficult to use too.""9 He also makes the ex- tremely important distinction that the classification is not the decimal nota- tion. Even though it is true that it was "the determining factor which induced La Fontaine and Otlet to adopt Dewey's system, in the present state of develop- ment of the system, it can no longer be said that the decimal notation consti- tutes its principal characteristic." Above all, UDC is a classification, "i.e., a sys- tem which should be divided according to principles of consistency, mutual ex- clusiveness and collocation, that sec- ondly it is a univcrsal classification, and that thirdly, this classification is divided according to a decimnal notation."50 Bradford, upon encountering this kind of criticism, or, more specifically, particular instances which it general- izes, would agree that the classification may well be all of this, but he would assert that it is primarily a bibliograph- ic classification and woul]d demand that the original purposes for which it was compiled be kept in mind before essay- ing criticism of it. His comments on the criticism of the classification by J. V. Jacks5" in the field of soil science are in this vein. Bradford stresses that the classification is not philosophic, nor is the order of the subjects the main con- cern: "We must not forget that the pri- mary purpose of the classification is not to put the literature of a science in or- der, but to arrange all documents in such a way that they can be found as quickly as possible, and to enable the many workers to collaborate in making a single comprehensive index of all knowledge, in which all the references 49 W. Scholten, "The Future Development of the Universal Decimal Classification," Reviewx of Docai- mentation (1947), 14:141. 50Ibid., pp. 142-43. 51 J. V. Jacks, "The Use of the Universal Decimal Classification at the Imperial Bureau of Soil Serv- ice" (with discussion by Bradford and others), BSIB Proceedings (1940), 2:49-55.
THE UDC AND FID 269 to the literature of a small topic can come together."52 It is interesting that Shera and Egan were able to conclude that one consequence of Bradford's support of UDC has been to encourage its establishment as a "standard medi- um of communication that transcends the barriers of nationality and lan- guage"-this being in their view one of the important contribuitions of classifi- cation to the international world of scholarship.53 These few but representative criti- cisms suggest that there is a continuing difficulty in understanding just what UDC is trying to do. The confusion arises from UDC's notation. Every bib- liographic classification, whether prin- cipally "bibliographic" or not, has at least three important aspects. The clas- sification must relate to the world of knowledge and give it some meaningful structure. Every classification embodies willy-nilly a "philosophy" of knowledge or is philosophical-it reflects and rep- resents the systematics of science and of knowledge in general; it is taxonomic. It must also permit subject specification and be sufficiently flexible to identify and relate to its main structure subjects meaningfully related bibliographically or not precisely enumerated in the clas- sification itself. It must also permit doc- ument specification. Each of these three aspects, platitudes perhaps of classifica- tion theory, depends upon the classifi- cation's notation, and though one must agree with Scholten and with Metcalfe (who constantly urges that the distinc- tion be kept clear) that a classification is not its notation, nevertheless, for the classification to be known and used, it must be represented symbolically by a notation. One might generalize and say that different classifications tend to em- phasize one or another of these aspects. Dewey, with its rigidity of ordering, "the Procrustean bed of the decimal ten" from which it constantly tries to escape, is oriented more to a world of knowl- edge whose unbridled growth has in- creasingly strained its categories and subdivisions to bursting point. It is less capable of flexible and complex subject specification, granted its necessity, than, say, CC with its emphasis on the syn- thesis of "elementary particles," as the basis of subject indication.54 UDC, on the other hand, has a different kind of division of emphasis. This has been tacitly recognized by its proponents and its critics alike. It is a vast, systematic table of subjects-it is "nothing less than a method for expressing notions of the mind in figures."55 It is one of the most comprehensive classifications ever published-it attempts to cover all vari- ations of points of view. It is a univ7ersal classification-"it is a practical system for numerically coding information."56 It goes beyond document specification and subject indication to document cod- ification. The original importance of the notation must be recognized, but its 52Ibid., pp. 55-56. 5 Shera and Egan, "A Review of the Present State of Librarianship and Documentation," op. cit. (n. 27 above), p. 35. 5' It is interesting in this context to note that as early as 1930, just before the spate of publications by Ranganathan began (the first edition of CC was issued in 1933), Duyvis reviewed trends in science towards synthetism, and examined and rejected the possibility in the near future that UDC would have to be reconstituted to deal with "polydimensional representations" along lines similar in broadest out- line to those of CC (F. Donker Duyvis, "4th Re- port of the Commission de la Classification Decimale," Documentatio Universalis [1931], pp. 51-52). Pollard, "The Decimal Bibliographic Classifi- cation . . ," op. cit. (n. 35 above), p. 4. 68 FID, Universal Decimal Classification (BS1000A), op. cit. (n. 37 above), p. 6.
270 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY continuing importance under the exi- gencies of effective classification must be deprecated. The classification is, in a sense, schiz- ophrenic-there is a division between the classification itself (the vast, or- dered elaboration of subjects) and its notation. They rival and conflict with each other for domination. As a biblio- graphical classification, it was designed minutely to specify the subjects con- tained in documents by using its nota- tion to relate a given document to as much of the classification as possible, so that its different relevances might be known. A machinery of number com- pounding and reversal is provided for this. But the classification, the sched- ules, and the signs of association can be used actually to express all the shades of "ideologico-bibliographical analysis" of a document. The notation then be- comes primary and subordinates the classification to its own purpose which is essentially linguistic, not bibliograph- ic. Pollard briefly adverts to Otlet's be- lief that the notation of UDC could be used as a language, the decimal num- bers being regarded as "number roots" which may be converted into "number wordsLby coupling with them "auxili- ary numbers expressing grammatical functions." Thus, "a medical corps will transport by cargo-boat the enlisted volunteers affected with asiatic cholera" becomes: 356.33001; 629-123.14'63'43; 355.216002; 616.932064.5 By scrambling, Pollard suggests that such a device could be made into an effective crypto- grammic code. Bradford, commenting on this, wrote that the use of UDC as the basis for an international language 'may be all very well," but its use as a secret code is "nonsense." For him all of this is irrelevant. "The only end for which the Decimal Classification is es- sential is for bibliographic co-opera- tion."58 Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that there are, as it were, two identities often at conflict within UDC -one bibliographic and the other lin- guistic. A pursuit of the origins of this latter aspect, generally neglected, along with a full understanding of what Otlet, and even Bradford, meant by "biblio- graphic co-operation" helps to provide a new kind of historical perspective for both UDC and FID. IV Otlet's attempted resolution of the linguistic-bibliographic duality in UDC puts him into a particular stream of European philosophy. In its most im- passioned expressions, his vision of bib- liographic organization completely tran- scended the practical limitations that must necessarily have been imposed up- on any contemporary manifestations of it, and he saw in his mind's eye a great, dynamic, global encyclopedia, with trib- utary streams flowing into it and swell- ing it from every country in the world. He is, therefore, the fellow of chambers, Buffon, Diderot, and the other encyclo- pedists. But his conception of UDC as the complement of this vast interna- tional venture, that is to say, as an in- ternational language, as an internation- al documentary information encoding device, places him in the company of a group of seventeenth-century philoso- phers of whom Dalgarno and Wilkins were the most important. To both groups, classification was essential. But the conjunction of these two elements in his theorizing suddenly presents us with Otlet in conversation with a par- " Pollard, "The Documentary Uses of Decimal Numbers," op. cit. (n. 36 above), p. 24. 18 Bradford, "Universal Decimal Classification," op. cit. (see n. 4 above), p. 66.
THE UDC AND FID 2 71 ticular seventeenth-century philosopher and encyclopedist, Leibniz. In the seventeenth century there was great concern over the nature of lan- guage and its inadequacies for scientific work, especially after the decline of Latin, the use of which had precluded all the linguistic vagaries of a vernacu- lar. A movement had been begun to devise a language to take the place of Latin, a universal philosophic and sci- entific language which would be "firstly an international auxiliary language for communication between people with different native tongues; secondly, a symbolic language for scientific pur- poses, truly expressing the nature of things; and thirdly, an instrument for scientific inference."59 Moreover, the character of the language, the word, the sign, was to be not merely an arbitrary symbol for the thing, but should indi- cate the thing's nature. "It should, as it were, represent its real definition." Hopefully, it would be like the symbol- ism of mathematics in its simplicity, precision, and convenience. A method of proceeding was suggested by Descartes. This was to isolate a set of "clear and simple ideas" from which more complex notions could be synthesized. Classifica- tion, therefore, would become central to the venture. Bishop Wilkins, who ac- tually invented such a language, pro- ceeded to find and arrange the funda- mental and other notions and things by traditional definition per genus et difierentiam, and tried to fit everything into an hierarchical organization like the taxonomic arrangements of botany or zoology. Leibniz, however, wanted to go fur- ther than these linguists. He recognized that "learned men have long since thought of some kind of language or universal characteristic by which all concepts and things can be put into beautiful order, and with whose help different nations might communicate their thoughts and each read in his own language what another has written in his." But, he goes on, proposing some- thing new: "No one has attempted a language or characteristic which in- cludes at once both the arts of discov- ery and of judgment, that is, one whose signs or characters serve the same pur- pose that arithmetical signs serve for numbers and algebraic signs for quan- tities taken abstractly."60 This idea long remained with him, Leibniz tells us, for with a characteristic such as he pro- poses the "human race will have a new kind of instrument which will increase the power of the mind far more than any hitherto devised" (an instrument, as Otlet was to observe in a similar context, "capable of acting powerfully on the very form of thought itself").6' How to arrive at the characteristic was the problem. Eventually Leibniz con- cluded: Nothing more is necessary to establish the characteristic which I am attempting, at least to a point sufficient to build the grammar of this wonderful language, and a dictionary for the most frequent cases, or, what amounts to the same thing, nothing more is necessary to set up the characteristic numbers for all ideas, than to develop a philosophical and mathematical "course of studies" as it is called based on a certain new method which I can set forth. . .. "Much of the following, except where indicated, is taken from K. Sparck Jones, Synonymy and Semanttic Classification (Cambridge: Cambridge Language Research Unit, 1964), Appendix I, "Thesaurus and Synonym Dictionaries" (sepa- rately paged), esp. pp. 9-27. e Gottfried W. Leibniz, Philosophical Papers and Letters: A Selection Translated and Edited by Leroy E. Loemaker, No. 24, "On the General Char- acteristic" (2 vols.; Chicago: University of Chi- cago Press, 1956), 1:340. 61 Otlet, Traite' de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above), p. 431.
272 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Nor would it require more work than is already being spent on a number of courses or encyclo- pedias as they are called.62 Indeed, he claims that a few selected men would take but two years to work out from first principles by an "infal- lible calculus" of his devising the doc- trines "most useful to life, that is, those of morality and metaphysics."63 The difficulties in establishing the characteristic, as Jones points out,64 are clearly twofold. First, "suitable infer- ential procedures" for the calculus ra- tiocinator were needed,65 and, second, "an appropriate conceptual classifica- tion of knowledge" was necessary for the identification and ordering of ideas so that they might be assigned "char- acteristic numbers." In seeking some insight into the concepts out of which our knowledge grows, Leibniz postu- lated an "alphabet of thoughts or a cat- alogue of the highest genera out of whose combination inferior concepts may be formed."66 The main task, then, becomes one of finding a "real defini- tion" for derivative or composite con- cepts, and this involves the resolution of the concept or "thing" into "simple primitive notions." From these defini- tions all truths can be demonstrated, and ultimately there can be derived from them "the elements of eternal truth in all things insofar as we under- stand them." By a proper balance be- tween analysis and synthesis, men will be able to bring under full control "our human knowledge of nature," which to Leibniz seems "at present like a shop well provided with all kinds of wares but without any order or inventory." Having gathered up all useful experi- mental historical and other material which "does not possess metaphysical necessity," one may then "prepare a record of phenomena from which a mixed knowledge can be formed by combining all truths abstracted from experience." From conceptual analysis and classification, and the development of a logical calculus, one may obtain, largely by deduction, that is to say, a universal encyclopedia of knowledge. In one of his last schemes for such an encyclopedia,6" Leibniz proposed that it be divided into three parts: a universal atlas, the encyclopedia itself which would contain the systematic analysis and synthesis of the sciences, and a small summary of the principal features of the main part. But the same tasks of analysis, clas- sification, and calculation that would produce the encyclopedia would also establish the main element of his uni- versal language-the universal charac- teristic. This seventeenth-century lin- guistic philosophers' stone would need to be represented by a notation. Leib- niz considered using letters and other notational forms, but he seems most to have believed in the efficacy of numbers for his purpose, and basic to his thought was the need to assign "characteristic numbers" to most concepts.68 Primitive concepts once isolated would be repre- 62 Leibniz, op. cit. (n. 60 above), p. 344. 63Ibid. '4Jones, op. cit. (n. 59 above), p. 24. 65 The calculus ratiocinator was discussed by Leibniz in many places. In the work cited above (n. 60), relevant papers are No. 26, I, "Elements of Calculus," 1:360-70; No. 26, II, "Specimen of Uni- versal Calculus," 1:370-80; and No. 41, "A Study in the Logical Calculus," 2:613-28. "6The following is taken from Leibniz, op. cit. (n. 60 above), No. 25, "On Universal Synthesis and Analysis, or the Art of Discovery and Judgment," 1:351-59. 67 Jones, op. cit. (n. 59 above), p. 25. 68 Leibniz, op. cit. (n. 60 above), No. 24, "On the General Characteristic," 1:344.
THE UDC AND FID 273 sented by "natural" signs or numbers. "Complex concepts would then be rep- resented by complex signs composed of primitive signs in such a way that their nature, that is their relation to the simple concepts, would be apparent from the structure of the signs."69 The manipulation of these signs by a logi- cal calculus, by which the language would become a kind of higher mathe- matics, would rid discourse of fallacious argument and obfuscation70 and would permit the orderly synthesis and pro- gression of knowledge in an encyclo- pedic form. V In effect, the figures which represent the classes and divisions of each subject unite into a single extremely simple numerical expression. The affiliation, the genealogy even, of the ideas and the objects, their dependence and subordi- nation . . . find an adequate representation in the bibliographic sign so formed. This repre- sentation nearly excludes the conventional and the arbitrary. Not only does each figure express in its fashion an essential idea, but the combi- nation of figures, that is to say, their order in the series and their place in the number, are produced even according to the laws of scien- tific logic. In this sense they constitute a true new language in which the phrases (here num- bers) are formed according to constant syntac- tical rules from figures (here numbers). It is a kind of synthetic language ("aglutinante"): the figures are the predicative and attributive roots in it-purely verbal roots in the sense that they are neither substantive, nor adjective, nor verbs. They are placed above and outside grammatical categories, in that they express abstractions, pure scientific categories. Under this double head, the Decimal Classification constitutes a veritable international scientific language, a complete symbology of science, susceptible of to-day bringing to the intellectual workers, help analogous to that which they re- ceived in the Middle Ages . . . from Latin.71 Here, in effect, is a summary expres,- sion by Otlet of many of the seven- teenth-century notions about a "real" character and an international scien- tific language, and an extension for it of Leibniz's tentative use of numbers. UDC is not even merely to provide an "alternative notation for existing lan- guage" that was one form the need for an international language took in the seventeenth-century.72 It is more, for it is but a step from the isolation of "pure scientific categories," the deriva- tion of expressions in the language by the use of "the laws of scientific logic," to some form of the "calculus ratioci- nator." But Otlet never pursued this much further. He became more inter- ested in a new form of the encyclopedia which documentation using UDC alone could accomplish. The role of a particu- lar classification such as UDC in this enormous venture is not fully and clear- ly developed by Otlet perhaps because he took it for granted. He does not make explicit the same kind of inter- connection that Leibniz did between the language, the classification, and the en- cyclopedia. But the implications of the developing idea of the encyclopedia for UDC are worth examining and suggest that botlh, after Leibniz, are interesting conceptual atavisms. Given the decimal language described so enthusiastically by Otlet, materials ordered according to the minute classi- fication it reflects inevitably take, per- haps crudely, the encyclopedic form en- visaged by Leibniz. Because of the de- tailed specification of class and subclass, UDC permits a "perfect localization" e9Jones, op. cit. (n. 59 above), p. 22. " Leibniz, op. cit. (n. 60 above), No. 24, "On the General Characteristic," 1:345. " Henri La Fontaine and Paul Otlet, "Creation d'un r6pertoire bibliographique universel, note pr6liminaire," IIB Publication (1896), No. 1, p. 23. 72 Jones, op. cit. (n. 59 above), p. 22.
2 74 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of topics or subjects-notions and things. "Une place pour chaque chose, et chaque chose a sa place." Insofar as what is being ordered is bibliographic, rather than real information, the result is an "encyclopedic table of the subject- matter of science." A world bibliog- raphy of bibliographies would act as a kind of "integrated bibliographic map, showing besides those regions already explored, those which remain to be known."73 An organization of the kind first imagined by Otlet and La Fontaine would permit "all that is published to be considered, whatever the place, the time, or the form of its printing, as ele- ments of an immense theoretical, his- torical, practical encyclopedia to that time, for which the repertory will be- come the table of contents."'4 When Otlet took this idea of an en- cyclopedia up again in 1908, he began to transform it dramatically. On the use and importance of UDC, he re- marked merely that in it one had a "documentary and bibliographic classi- fication . . . which makes available for the work of classification a notation or documentary language, rich to the extent of forty thousand headings which can yield an almost unlimited number of combinations."75 With this tool, the work of documentary or- ganization could go on. Two kinds of institutions would in the future deal with documents, that in their total- ity form a "graphic memory of man- kind, the material body of our sciences and our knowledge." These institutions would be libraries and bureaus ("L'- Office"). Libraries would relinquish their concept of conservation as an end in itself and would actively circulate books in two ways: for scientific and literary study and for popularization. Local barriers between libraries would break down. The national library would become "the heart or mind of a vast organization in which books circulate and exchange." Eventually, libraries would not be regarded as the comple- ments of the schools and universities but would themselves become univer- sities, "Universitates Litterarum, mod- ern universities of the written word, en- croaching each day on the domain of the old universities of the spoken word." And above all local and national librar- ies would loom one to which they should all contribute, the Repertoire Biblio- graphique Universel being its catalog- a Universal Library, "L'Archivium de l'Humanite."76 The other institution, the bureau, would deal not with the documents themselves but with the information in them, information released from the physical constrictions of its commercial vehicle and organized according to the principles of the new science of docu- mentation. The bureau, in effect, would consist of repertoires of dossiers or files. These "unique for each question and formed from analytical elements on sheets or cards . . . containing in ex- tract form all that has been written on the matter and kept rigorously up to date, will be agreed upon as the most practical form for conserving and trans- mitting documented information."77 Eventually, these would be published "La Fontaine and Otlet, "Creation d'un reper- toire bibliographique universel," op. cit. (n. 71 above), pp. 6-7. 74Ibid., p. 23. 5 La Fontaine and Otlet, "L'Etat actuel des ques- tions bibliographiques .. . ," op. cit. (n. 21 above), p. 167. T6lbid., pp. 177-78. 77Ibid., p. 182.
THE UDC AND FID 2 75 on cards78 or in loose-leaf form, and eventually the bureau and the library would be incorporated as two depart- ments of a new institution, a kind of encyclopedic megalopolis, "the name of which does not matter." (Pages calls it, as mentioned earlier, "Documento- theque.") In a ringing peroration (for his other publications show him respon- sible for most of these ideas), Otlet en- visions this new institution and the files of sheets and cards accumulating with- in it as "the book" of the future-"le livre de l'avenir, c'est l'office."79 These are important concepts for Otlet, for through them he attempts to achieve a kind of apotheosis of documentation. The UDC, the RBU, and the Universal Library hopefully abuilding are all no more than stages in the evolution of a "great universal book."80 This would "resolutely abandon" the traditional form of the book with its arbitrary and unhelpful physical division by pages and lines for a form in which each "in- tellectual element" will be represented by or have corresponding to it "a physi- cal element." These elements when coded by and brought together mean- ingfully by an adequate classification will effect a synthesis and will therefore form an encyclopedia of knowledge. This encyclopedia will have far greater proportions than was ever imagined. It will consist of hundreds of thousands of pages, perhaps millions. It will be permanent with daily additions; it will be systematic because of the order of the UDC; it will be documentary be- cause it will contain the original texts themselves or summaries of them; it will be a co-operative venture of work- ers from everywhere in the world.8" In- deed, the encyclopedia and philosophy in their devotion to synthesis have tra- ditionally been but two aspects of the one thing, though in latter days the en- cyclopedia has become little more than an instrument of popularization. Otlet plans to restore the traditional intimacy of their relationship.82 Given the sorts of analysis of documents and the sub- sequent resynthesis of their contents necessary to create from them the ency- clopedia, there must also occur concom- itantly a process of codification. For Otlet, codification is "the ultimate form of documentation."83 "It consists of (1) saying things only once; and (2) expressing things in terms such that the general idea precedes the particular idea and is elevated to the rank of prin- ciples, norms, laws, rules."84 It is not necessary to follow Otlet beyond this point into the realms of "meta-bibliographie," "vers les regions transcendantes." Classification, the very "key-stone of the arch of thought and of the document,"85 is implicit at every step in his reasoning. Without it, without a documentary classification, the encyclopedia could not be organ- ized, "codification" would be impos- sible. Ideally the classification to be used would "order systematically all ideas, all objects, all things, and will assign to each a corresponding classifi- cation number, destined to be inscribed on all writings and on each of their 8 Paul Otlet, "Une solution du probleme de 1'encyclopedie sur fiches," IIB Publication (1906), No. 81. 7 La Fontaine and Otlet, "L'Etat actuel des ques- tions bibliographiques . .. ," op. cit. (n. 21 above), p. 182. ' Paul Otlet, "L'Avenir du livre et de la bi- bliographie," IIB Bulletin (1911), p. 289. 81Ibid., p. 291. 82 Ibid., p. 295. I Otlet, Traite de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above), p. 409. 84Ibid., p. 411. 8S Ibid., p. 430.
276 THE LIB3RARY QUARTERLY distinct parts."86 But its notation, by which it exists in "thle domain of com- municable realities," in order to be appropriate for the highly sophisticated task it is to perform, must be synthetic and superior to "our poor languages and our old writing." It should combine the better features of, among other things, scientific terminology and math- ematics. Once such a synthetic classifi- cation is fully developed with a concise notation for ideas, then the world has been provided with a "universal written langtuage capable of acting powerfully on the very form itself of thought."87 Otlet has, in a sense, ended where thirty years before he had begun, arguing from a classification and its notation to an international language with a more or less "real" character, throtugh the various stages of his encyclopedia and back again to the language, nota- tion, and classification. That UDC ap- proaches the ideal classification de- scribed in the last pages of the Traite is evident from his description of it in the main body of the work.88 VI Otlet was nothing if not an idealist, and the fervor of the last pages of the Tr-aite and of mauch of his other writing betrays not only the prophet, for he was that, but something of the poet, too. Out of all the fervor and the prophecy noth- ing much came. The institutions Otlet imagined never developed, apart from some unco-ordinated, isolated informa- tion bureaus in various countries, which were little different from special librar- ies. The problem of international organ- ization for documentation proved too great. The central administrative body set up for it was turned out of its quar- ters in the Palais Mondial. The card catalogs grew too bulky, inefficient, and cumbersome. The institutional aspect of FID was largely abandoned in favor of an associative, consultative organiza- tion. Otlet died. In a sense all that re- mains are "two trunkless legs"-the changed FID and UDC. All the rest is superseded, impractical, in a way "old- fashioned." Curiously, the whole idea of the "living" encyclopedia supported by an international complex of bureaus pooling their resources and organizing them by UDC suffered a brief Lazarus- like resurrection in the thirties in Eng- land where the "special bureau" and the use of UDC were firmly entrenched.89 But this momentary revivification serves only to emphasize the apparent unreality of the venture and the finality with which the sands have settled around it. As bibliographical history, however, one should not underestimate its impor- tance. It is not, to return to some of the points made at the beginning of this pa- per, simply curious and irrelevant. FID and UDC, because they continue to de- velop fruitfully, demand that attention be paid to it in order that they may be fully understood, no matter how ves- tigial the early concepts may come to seem. Otlet's work on UDC has yet an- other historical importance, for it has led directly into a new kind of docu- mentation, sometimes loosely called in- formation science but perhaps more 6Otlet, "L'Avenir du livre et de la blbiographie," op. cit. (n. 80 above), p. 289. 87 OtJct, Traite de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above), p. 431. s Ibid., pp. 380-83 . "' A. F. C. Pollard, "The Mobilization of Knowl- edte and the Permanent World Encyclopedia of Mr. H. G. Wells," FID 14th Conference, Transac- tions (1938), 2:c161-67; and "A Proposed Plan for the Mobilization of Bibliographical References to the Contents of the World's Non-Fiction Litera- ture," BSIB Proceedings (1943), 5:55-73.
THE UDC AND FID 277 properly called Information Retrieval. According to Shera and Egan, UDC is extremely important because it attempt- ed to "divorce" classification "from the book as physical object" and permitted the retrieval of "even the most minute conceptual units . .. from large agglom- erations of accumulated record."90 In Shera and Egan's view, before Cleverdon, Vickery, Faradane, Foskett, and the others, came Ranganathan. Be- fore Ranganathan came Bradford, but, as has been shown, for Bradford docu- mentation was UDC and UDC means Otlet and his encyclopedic repertories. One can point up the relevance of this sort of genealogy by a simple transla- tion. If for the numbers expressing the various constituent ideas, facts, themes of a given document as closely classified by UDC as Otlet would wish one substi- tutes "descriptors" precipitated from exhaustively indexing it, and if for the concept of a classified repertory of printed cards of a standardized size and format one substitutes the concepts of punched cards or magnetic tape and mechanical or electronic sorting ma- chines, and especially the computer, documentation Otlet-style may be seen to have a quite extraordinary contem- poraneity.9' This presents an interesting paradox, for there can be no doubt that if the concepts discussed in the preceding pages were women's fashions of an earlier age they could be described and dismnissed as "quaint." The paradox is heightened by other similarities. There exists for both Otlet-style documen- tation and Information Retrieval a panaceatic literature. Both were re- garded fearfully and unnecessarily as threats in traditional librarianship. Both were conceived of as enormous revolu- tions and completely new. Documenta- tion had its visionaries and prophets, and so does Information Retrieval, and the prophets of both exclaim upon a promised land of complete bibliographi- cal and information felicity into which their systems will lead the converted. They provide a healthy corrective for each other. The institutional aspect of documen- tation Otlet-style is important today for anyone interested in examining recent institutional developments in biblio- graphic organization in countries such as the United States and Great Britain, and, most interestingly, in Europe where supranational bodies having spe- cial information needs have appeared. We are now witnessing, after a period of "natural" evolution, the gradual maturation of the "information center." The idea of such centers is far from be- ing new, as this paper shows; its roots go back at least as far as Otlet and the IIB, perhaps even to Leibniz and his encyclopedia. Indeed, the apparent per- mianence of this new kind of biblio- graphical agency now constitutes a be- lated justification for all of OtletCs plan- ning, theorizing, and striving. But it were as though all this theorizing, plan- ning, and striving with its strong global emphasis has gone for nothing. Infor- mation centers (which in some ways I Shera and Egan, "A Review of the Present State of Librarianship and Documentation," op. cit. (n. 27 above), p. 35. ' Otlet anticipated punched cards (edge-notched) as information-storage devices and "statistical ma- chines" permitting the development of a "mechani- cally consultable book." He also reviewed the effects for the transformation of the book, of television, the cinema, sound recordings, and above all, of microphotography. There was something of the bibliographical Jules Verne about him. See his "L'Avenir du livre et de la bibliographie," op. cit. (n. 80 above), pp. 290-91; "Le livre microphoto- graphique," IIB Bulletin (1911), pp. 215-22; and his Traite' de documentation, op. cit. (n. 10 above), pp. 429-31.
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY resemble Otlet's book and encyclopedia of the future) have grown up in na- tional and institutional isolation in re- sponse to particular and specialized needs. Their "social" role has not yet been adequately defined, nor has their work been properly co-ordinated either with that of each other or with that of older bibliographic and information gathering, organizing, and transmitting agencies, such as research and special libraries. At the moment, "special libraries," "documentation centers," and "infor- mation centers" are terms one may use almost interchangeably and with no in- crease in confusion. One recent book, raising all kinds of hope in its preface that it might clarify the issues involved in the recognition that the information center is here to stay, abruptly dashes them in chapter 3 with the following def- inition: "An information center, for pur- poses of this book, will be considered as any library or collection of documents which serves more than one or a few people"92-and this despite more care- ful and rigorous attempts at definition beginning to find their way into the liter- ature.3 The whole problem of information centers is complicated and confused. For many librarians the Weinberg Report,94 which advocates them and provides a rationalization for them, tolls dismally in their ears of supercession; for others the new developments are an exciting challenge to essay fresh approaclhes to traditional tasks, functions, and struc- tures, and to secure as much co-opera- tion as possible between agencies re- sponsible for similar but different tasks.95 The confusion, the lack of in- formation, the excess of irrelevant in- formation, the misinformation, and un- timely prejudice about what might be called the frosting on a very solid biblio- graphic pound cake are perhaps under- standable; they are not inevitable. To stand back a little, to try to obtain some perspective of the institutions and social conditions that seem to be producing information centers as matters of prac- tical as opposed to theoretical necessity, is to help to introduce order into the chaotic literature about them, to as- suage the affront and panic of those who see them as threats, and to increase the incisiveness of the thought of those ana- lyzing them and prescribing for them appropriate tasks and a place in the ex- isting scheme of things. In a way, his- tory is a kind of heuristic of the present. The history of information centers takes its source in Otlet, the IIB, the spread of "documentation," and the particular kinds of work for which UDC was de- vised and continues to be developed. 92 Allen Kent, Specialized Information Centers (Washington, D.C.: Spartan Books, 1965), p. 23. '9 Alan M. Rees, "Librarians and Information Centers," College anid Research Libraries (May, 1964), 25:200-204. 'U.S. President's Science Advisory Committee, Science Government and Information (The Wein- berg Report) (Washington, D.C.: The White House, 1963). ' Scott Adams, "The Scientific Revolution and the Research Library," Library Resources a.zd Technical Services (Spring, 1965), 9:133-42.