A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PUBLIC LIBRARY AS A COMMUNITY LEARNING CENTER FOR INDEPENDENT STUDY Margaret E. Monroe Public libraries, in responding to growing interest in adult independent study, are beginning to reexamine their role as community learning centers. Different kinds of learning centers emphasize: priority on provision of materials; collaboration with academic institutions and agencies through an independent study information and referral service; a multimedia center supported by educational counseling and study guidance; and a community task force approach which provides learning-center serv- ices in the midst of community problem solving. Differences among learners, learning situations, and learning styles as well as in library resources and community programs will affect the evolution of any particular public library community learning center. Traditionally, public libraries have been stimulated to develop new modes of client services when technology opens new opportunities or when social change makes clear that a gap exists between the user and the library. Films have led not only to new collections but also to program planning assistance by public libraries to community organizations. The new urban populations have required not only new collections but new methods of delivering infor- mation services, and outreach services and information center functions have evolved with new styles of interaction with library users. The capacity to respond to opportunity and necessity is the survival skill of greatest signifi- cance in this era of fast-paced change. Within the past fifteen years educational technology and economic necessi- ty have combined to make continuing education on an independent-study basis truly viable. Programmed texts, audiotaped and videotaped lectures, educational films of great variety packaged with workbooks and tapes into "learning kits," computer-assisted instruction, and a multitude of other com- binations of media and electronic devices have begun to be utilized to supple- ment classroom instruction and to serve reasonably well, in combination with more traditional forms of print materials, for independent study [1; 2, pp. 96- 114; 3]. Independent study in its many forms and formats has emerged to meet the need for mastery of a rapidly changing technology and an ever-augmented [Library Quarterly, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 54-61) C 1976 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 54
PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND INDEPENDENT STUDY 55 and increasingly complicated body of knowledge. The influence of these new forms of study is felt in basic education as well as in continuing education. Higher education is undergoing major changes in forms of instruction, with nontraditional college degree programs relying on independent study and internships, research projects, teleteaching, and other forms used by the aca- demic adviser to construct a "contract program" with the individual student [4]. In short, the educational institution that grants degrees under these styles of instruction releases the student to learn at his own pace and assumes the role of counselor and provider of the resources of learning [2, pp. 34-39]. Academic libraries acquire a new importance in serving the needs of the academic program under such plans, and the counseling function, as well as the provision of materials, is often placed in the hands of the media specialists within the framework of the academic subject guidelines [5, 61. Such nontraditional forms of undergraduate education challenge public library service to the student only in the traditional ways of providing study materials to supplement the basic texts and related media provided by the campus institution, and of providing the usual guidance to a student who chooses to use the public library as his study center for reading or for prepa- ration of papers. The forms of nontraditional study, however, that truly challenge the public library to assume a new role are those that rely upon exemption examination to confer credit equivalence. The College Level Examination Program (CLEP) [7], developed by the College Entrance Examination Board (CEEB), enables students to demonstrate a level of competence based on earlier study, independent reading, or life experience; academic institutions individually determine the acceptability of CLEP scores for advanced standing or for college credit. CLEP offers the examinations, but it cannot feasibly prepare the student to pass them; the student must devise his own procedure for readying himself for the examinations. Here students may regularly turn to the public library as the basic support system for their degree-oriented educa- tion. But it is important to add immediately that such forms of independent study, once generally available through the public library, will be pursued as well by adults who wish merely to learn and who have no plan for, nor reason to pursue, degree programs. In short, the mere availability of learning mate- rials, organized in a study center and attractive in their presentation, may begin to stimulate adults to use the public library as a learning center for independent study. It is important to recognize that the phrase "independent study" has broad significance-quite unrelated to the academic environment or degree pro- grams-which has been summed up in Allen Tough's phrase "the adult's learning projects" [8]. Based at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Educa- tion, Tough in 1970 surveyed sixty-six adults (comprising factory workers, mothers, teachers, white-collar workers, politicians, and professors) and found that their independent-learning projects fell into six broad categories: prepar-
56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing for an occupation and then keeping up; learning specific tasks and prob- lems on the job; learning for home and personal responsibilities; improving some broad area of competence; learning for interest or leisure; and explor- ing a subject out of curiosity. Of the sixty-six whom he interviewed, all but one had conducted at least one learning project in the past year; the median number of such learning projects for factory workers was 5.5, for lower-in- come white-collar workers 8.5, for politicians 7, for teachers 9, and for profes- sors 1 1.5. No one spent less than a total of 13 hours on this typical learning project, while one politician spent as much as an average of 464 hours on each of his study projects. Tough identified print resources as the most commonly used "non-human resources": books, monographs, professional and technical journals, popular magazines, newspapers, workbooks, programmed texts, etc. The 1970 survey found that almost all learners used several nonhuman resources in addition to four or five human resources in preparing to study as well as in studying itself. Librarians were specifically recognized as one often-used human resource in planning a program of study. Independent study, then, was recognized in Tough's study as many-faceted, often taking place outside the context of academic study, and almost always involving some forms of resources typical- ly available from public libraries. Philosophy of the Public Library as a Learning Center for Independent Study The case for the public library as a community learning center for indepen- dent study may be made at any of a number of positions in the philosophic spectrum, from conservative or traditional to liberal or nontraditional. Most conservatively, a public library may view its mission as the support of learn- ing through the provision of requested materials or of materials on requested subjects. Such a mission may involve the public library in responding in an informed way to those who wish to participate in learning opportunities such as those offered through the regularly televised courses of Sunrise Semester or through individually designed programs of study developed for CLEP. It may also involve assistance to the adult learner in the selection of materials for study unrelated to any academic program. Collections, interlibrary loans, informa- tion service and book advice will inevitably be involved at this level of sup- port to individual learner requests. Moving from this most conservative or traditional position toward a more liberal or nontraditional position, a public library may see its mission as including also the collaborative approach to independent-study programs spon- sored by community, state, or national educational institutions. Such collabo- ration (1) would require a conscious preparation of staff with information and skills to carry out the library's collaborative work, (2) would inevitably
PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND INDEPENDENT STUDY 57 make the public library a source of information on independent-study oppor- tunities throughout the community and a first point of contact for its users, (3) would refer interested adults to an academic institution for academic counseling, (4) would involve stocking the library with materials recommend- ed for use in independent-study programs (books, programmed texts, tapes, learning packages), and (5) would require the use of the library's information network and interlibrary loan system for special explorations developed by the student in the course of his study. The public library and the academic institution involved would tend to develop a common plan as a basis for successful collaboration, and would need to define clearly differentiated ob- jectives for the two institutions. Finally, the public library would be involved in the regular evaluation of the project. In short, the collaborative approach represents the public library's commitment to a specific program of service to independent study, as an equal partner with the academic institution but with a distinctive role. A third position on the philosophic spectrum is marked by the public library which, with an even more distinctly liberal or nontraditional view, sees its role as an independent community learning center. Such an independent role would, of course, also encompass the conservative roles of provision of re- quested materials and of materials on requested subjects. This role might also include the "collaborative approach" as part of its total program. In this independent role, the library may accept responsibility for stimulating wide- spread use of independent-study programs, for developing reading-study guides beyond the programs of local academic institutions, and for providing the facilities and special equipment as well as study materials needed for an independent community learning center. Such a center in a public library would house a rich collection of learning materials (study programs, learning kits, multimedia packages, films, recordings, videotapes, adult learning games, etc.) and would make them available with the record players, tape recorders, projectors, computer consoles, learning machines, and reading and study space required for their adequate use. It would provide guidance to adults who choose study independent of academic institution programs: guid- ance in selection of subjects, of a study program, and of study materials. Guidance could be given on study skills and library-use skills to independent students individually or in groups, and could include the construction of planned reading-study programs for them. Perhaps the most liberal or nontraditional philosophic position would re- quire the library to identify the significant problem situations in the commu- nity and to activate learning through the use of library materials and library services to solve these problems in a community task force style. Whether the problems involved are the formulation of government policy, the devel- opment of new industrial activity in the community, breaking the barriers of racism in schools or churches, or the creation of new roles for the retired adult, the library could activate a community task force approach to learning
58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and problem solving. Clearly, the public library, in using this task force approach to problem solving for the "learning society," would work collabo- ratively with governmental, educational, and social agencies and with orga- nizations and citizen groups who share responsibility, concern, and resources for solving community problems. While the community task force approach to public library service to inde- pendent learning falls outside the narrower sense of the term "independent study" as it is now coming to be understood, it falls clearly within the library's adult education role as envisioned by Ralph A. Beals in 1943. Beals, then an adult educator and only later a librarian and director of the New York Public Library, defined the public library's role in adult education as the "infusion of authentic knowledge into the thinking and decision-making of the community" [9]. It is the same philosophy that led the Detroit Public Library to respond to the Detroit race riots of 1943 with an impressive exhibit on "The Races of Mankind" which thousands of Detroiters viewed in solem- nity during the month following the riots. The community task force ap- proach to library service to a learning society is a concept which incorporates the responsibility of the public library for bringing its resources skillfully to bear on decision making in the community at the right time and in the right way for impact. There may well be other positions on the philosophic spectrum, but the range is illustrated by these four: provision of requested materials, the colla- borative approach to academic study programs, the independent community learning center, and the community task force approach to problem solving. For each philosophic position there are different library goals. These goals may be implemented by different sets of measurable objectives related to the particular public to whom the library's programs of service in the community learning center are oriented. For some libraries, the move from "conserva- tive" to "liberal" positions may prove to be less a move in philosophic com- mitment than phases of growth in the library's developing program in sup- port of independent study and the concept of a learning society. Dimensions of the Learning Process In conceiving itself as a community learning center, the library must view its users in a variety of dimensions related to the learning process. The level of educational attainment of the public to be served may determine the study meth- ods and materials for achieving independent study goals. The collection and service program serving not only the college graduate's continuing education program but also the newly literate adult's vocational study must be broad and varied. A clear decision on the publics to be served in terms of levels of prior experience in formal education will clarify objectives, programs, and resource needs. The learning situations in which members of the community engage include
PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND INDEPENDENT STUDY 59 academic study on campus, independent formal study, informal reading and investigation, study in autonomous groups, and organized community prob- lem solving in task forces. It is important that a library determine the types of learning situations which it will attempt to serve, since service models and staff requirements will be determined largely by this choice. The learning public can also be viewed usefully in terms of its backgrounds in the subjects or problems to be studied. Houle and Nelson utilized some relevant categories: the inattentive, the attentive, the actively concerned, and the ex- pert [10]. The materials and services which the learning center provides will differ greatly for each level of learner, since the learner who has been inatten- tive to the subject or problem of study must learn its scope, structure, issues, and significance to himself and to society. The actively concerned, on the other hand, are ready to probe ongoing developments in the field and to associate with others of equal or greater knowledgeability in newer aspects of the subject. Programmed texts may serve the beginner well in a technical field, while research reports may be most appropriate for the actively con- cerned and the expert. Finally, the learning styles of individuals differ. It is now a truism that most adults seeking information tend to turn first to persons whom they know for information before turning to the published resources a library contains. In- dividual preferences for print, visual aids, or discussion of ideas either with an instructor or in groups of other learners must be taken into account in devel- oping a support system for independent study. The Dallas Public Library's use of a variety of workshop sessions open to any interested independent students shows a sensitive adjustment to the need for this contact for many learners willing to try independent study [11]. The Denver Public Library's multimedia "catalytic synchronisms" composing the Time-Alive program- short, enticing exposures to learning through print, art, sound, realia-recog- nize the diversity of preferences and media styles for learning [12]. In addition to these four dimensions of the learning process, there are others (such as the individual student's purpose within the range of possible purposes) which will also affect the services needed from the public library. Identification of these dimensions and clear choices within each are impor- tant to the public library's building a sound support system to independent study. The Library Independent Study and Guidance Project, sponsored by the College Entrance Examination Board in its initial phases and then funded by grants from the U.S. Office of Education, Council on Library Resources, and the National Endowment for the Humanities, has enabled some fifteen pub- lic library systems throughout the United States to develop staff skills and construct educational programs through a careful planning process that has been sensitive to these dimensions of the learning process [13]. The success of these programs in a variety of styles [14] documents the feasibility of the public library's role as a community learning center.
60 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Some Conclusions Public libraries of modest size as well as large ones with specialized staff can develop a learning-center role for independent study. Determination of the role which the library can afford to play, a decision on the special publics that will be served in independent study, a search for the appropriate aca- demic institutions with which to build a collaborative program, and a judi- cious choice of the specific areas in which the public library might play an independent role-these decisions, made and embodied in a plan for action, are feasible for even the smallest library. Economy of effort in a minimal program need not be in basic conflict with excellence of service. Reading guidance to be provided in a library unit lacking professional staff may be limited to prepackaged reading-study guides; reliance on national publicity for CLEP and related programs may simplify the library's program of outreach; a good referral service from the library to the academic institution for counseling may assure the adult stu- dent of good guidance; informal assistance in the use of library resources and effective interlibrary loans would complete a minimal program at the colla- borative level. A highly developed program, on the other hand, would in- crease the initiative taken by the library in: (1) reading-study guide prepara- tion by the library for the student; (2) a program of local publicity and outreach to supplement and reinforce national publicity for independent study; (3) training of staff in reading guidance and in the preliminary steps of academic counseling; (4) group seminars and workshops on library skills and study skills, as well as lecture-discussion sessions on popular topics under study; and (5) purchase of a wide range of materials and packaged learning programs to offer the richest possible basis for choice of study materials. Wisdom lies in doing the possible and doing it well. Poor planning may err either in the direction of a too ambitious program which fails community expectations or of a too modest aspiration which fails the community not for lack of resources but for lack of imagination. The availability of such national programs as CLEP and of such statewide programs as New York's Empire College and New Jersey's Thomas Edison College provides great encour- agement for public libraries to develop a support system of materials and guidance and to stimulate their use. This is at least the first step toward a public library learning center for independent study in the "learning soci- ety. " REFERENCES 1. Carnegie Commission on Higher Education. 7he Fourth Revolution: Instructional Technology in Higher Education. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1972. 2. Commission on Non-traditional Study. Diversity by Design. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc., 1974.
PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND INDEPENDENT STUDY 61 3. Hesburgh, Theodore M.; Miller, Paul A.; and Wharton, Clifton R. Patterns for Lifelong Learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc., 1973. 4. Houle, Cyril 0. The Extemal Degree. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc., 1973. 5. Knapp, Patricia B. "Independent Study and the Academic Library." In Approach to Indepen- dent Study. Compiled by Winslow R. Hatch and Alice L. Richards. New Dimensions in Higher Education, no. 13. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Office of Education, Division of Higher Education, 1965. 6. Shores, Louis; Jordan, Robert; and Harvey, John, eds. 7he Library College. Philadelphia: Drexel Press, 1966. 7. College Entrance Examination Board. "College Level Examination Program." College and University 44 (1969): 451-66. 8. Tough, Allen. The Adult's Learning Projects. Toronto: Ontario Institute for Studies in Educa- tion, 1971. 9. Beals, Ralph A. "The Public Library as an Agency for General Education." In Library in General Education. Forty-second Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, pt. 2. Chicago: Department of Education, University of Chicago, 1943. 10. Houle, Cyril O., and Nelson, Charles A. The University, the Citizen, and World Affairs. Wash- ington, D. C.: American Council on Education, 1956. 11. Brooks, Jean S., and Reich, David L. The Public Libra?y in Non-traditiwnal Education. Home- wood, Ill.: ETC Publications, 1974. 12. Hervey, Elizabeth. A Study of Existing and Potential Relationships between Public and Academic Libraries. Boulder, Colo.: Resources Development Internship Program, Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, 1973. 13. 77Te Role of Public Libraries in Supporting Adult Independent Learning: An Interim Assessment. New York: Library Independent Study and Guidance Projects, College Entrance Examination Board, 1974. 14. Program Summaries of the Participating Project Libranres. New York: Library Independent Study and Guidance Projects, College Entrance Examination Board, 1974.