From Our Readers . . . Is academic freedom dead at UCLA's Graduate School of Library and Information Science? Eleven UCLA faculty members signed a letter (JELIS, Fall 1990, p. 173) that attacks, on ideological grounds alone, a well-researched and statisti- cally sound article by Donald Case and John Richardson (JELIS, Winter 1990). It is remarkable that the signers of the letter are members of a profes- sion that champions freedom of speech and opposes any restriction on dissemination of controversial opinions. It is also remarkable that they engage in public name-calling ("racist") to protest what they imagine is ideological impurity in the article. They evidently lacked substantive criticism. Over thirty years ago, suspected Communists were harassed and hounded in similar ways, and with as little cause. Cecilia Wittmann Drury College, Springfield, Missouri Having just read the views of Case and Richardson's "colleagues" at UCLA (JELIS, Fall 1990), we feel compelled to add our comments. If a research report in a scholarly jour- nal devoted to education for our profession cannot be evaluated in an objective, emotion-free manner, then our profession and its profes- sors are indeed in trouble. We found nothing in the article to sug- gest that the authors held racist attitudes. In fact, Case and Richardson explicitly stated that making decisions "on the basis of gender and foreign background runs counter to some of our stated professional goals." The attempt by a majority of UCLA's faculty to dis- tance themselves from the article (and apparently from its authors) implies that the accusation of rac- ism is justified and does substantial discredit not to the authors of the article but to the signers of the letter to the editor. While it is certainly true that the faculty members at UCLA have every right to express their opinion on their colleagues' work, it seems very strange that this should be done without pointing out the offending statements so that readers could form an objective opinion. Exploring demographic variables such as gender and race issues re- quires tact and sensitivity, but surely such study is not inherently prejudi- cial. Some of the signers of the letter have probably conducted such dem- ographic studies. It is difficult to understand how groups that need special attention and funding for re- tention in academic programs can be identified if studying factors such as dropout rates is not permissible. Some of the perception of bias in Case and Richardson's article may be the product of methodological problems. Although the authors do not explicitly state the test used in comparing means, it appears to be a t test for independent samples. If this is so, then the wrong statistic has been reported in the article, and statements regarding significance are very suspect. The F statistic, which is reported throughout the article, is properly an indicator of Spring 1991 381
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science which calculation of the t statistic should be used in analysis. If the F statistic is significant, meaning that the independent samples are from populations with dissimilar vari- ance, the separate variance t statistic is used; otherwise the pooled vari- ance t statistic is used. T values have not been reported in the article; there is the appearance of the F statistic and its significance level having been used mistakenly as an indicator of differences in means. Some of the differences in means, such as 2.3 versus 2.2 years of work experience or a 3.2 undergraduate GPA versus 3.4, just do not logically seem substantial enough to be sig- nificant. At the same time, a mean difference of 100 points on the GRE analytical score seems somewhat likely to be significant. It is unfortu- nate that the referee system for the journal failed to catch these prob- lems. A simple note to the authors would have allowed them to correct their analysis and saved them from embarrassment. Since we are sure many of the signers of the letter are regular us- ers of statistical tests, the fact that they did not notice or at least did not comment on what appears to be a substantial methodological error argues that their comments may have been made without a thorough reading of the paper itself. Damn- ing without presenting evidence is not in the highest academic tradi- tion. Damning without reading is inexcusable. In short, although Case and Richardson may have made a simple and understandable error in statisti- cal analysis, to accuse them of rac-ism (why were they not also accused of sexism and xenophobia?) is excessive and unjustified. The disclaimer is- sued by Case and Richardson's co- workers is an unfortunate commen- tary on collegiality at that institution, an abridgment of Case and Richardson's intellectual freedom, and an embarrassment to library and information science education. Connie \&n Fleet, Danny P. Wallace, and Bert R. Royce School of Library and Informa- tion Science, Louisiana State University 382 Volume 31, Number 4