Much has been written about the changing paradigms of the academic library—as accumulator and preserver of knowledge resources, service provider for accessing information, and facilitator of intentional learning and knowledge creation among its visitors. For each of these missions, the spaces of the library, whether physical or virtual, have been constructed and adapted with the hope of improving capacity to contribute to the university. Typically such building processes, at least within physical facilities, are guided with direction from planners, architects, and interior designers. Collectively they provide protocols and professional standards to create program plans, construction documents, and ultimately the basis for ribbon-cutting celebrations. Virtual library spaces are evolving with similar “architects” and development procedures to launch dynamic environments for the parallel functions of digital archives and repositories, retrieval and delivery systems, and social learning and research communities. Librarians have engaged to varying degree in these processes, some having developed insights to do so with a specialized expertise that directs the definition of the library in terms of its architecture. As C. W. Hartman observed a decade ago, “Libraries today are in transition both as institutions and as a building type” [1]. What is less established in practice is the purposeful assessment of library space for understanding and improvement of the academic library it houses. This essay offers a framework to consider different factors affecting such an assessment and insights for undertaking a meaningful inquiry about the relationship of space to an academic library’s purpose and ambitions. It aims to explore the complex and sometimes foggy intersection of two components of this relationship. On the one hand, applied research has protocols to conduct program and outcome assessments, and, on the other hand, there is an assumption that space and environment influence an institution’s program and the subsequent behaviors of those who benefit from that program. Published accounts of library building programs, reflections on the changing orientation of academic libraries, and attempts to assess physical library spaces have influenced the preparation of this essay. It proposes multiple paths for approaching such assessment, differentiating the assessment’s purpose and the types of questions posed by it, data-gathering methodologies, and reporting strategies of results by the perspectives on the library’s purpose. These paths are useful to gain insights into the evolving role of the library and its contribution to the academic enterprise. Not surprisingly, the inquiry turns as well to changes in the identity of librarians as separate from the building where they work. Research is a systematic and purposeful process of data collection and analysis. More specifically, assessment utilizes data for description, sometimes in terms of established criteria. By contrast, evaluations occur when judgments are made using data gathered. The terms are used with mixed clarity in the literature and, thus, often interchangeably. Both processes may be considered applied research, but if taken away from a specific context for problem solving or managerial decision making, their empirical basis may contribute to the formation of theory to explain or predict. Formal inquiry about library spaces has only recently begun to be conducted and reported, suggesting that spaces mostly have been subjected to descriptive assessments, with few sharable evaluations or evolved theories to inform practice. Assessment or evaluation typically occurs for constructing or remodeling spaces at one of two stages—in advance, to inform design, and in conclusion, to judge and possibly improve the end product. These two functions are informed by two different types of evaluation research. Formative evaluation provides developers information for the formation or improvement of something (e.g., product, service, building design), while summative evaluation examines the effects of the object, confirming that the intentions of goals are met by summarizing or describing what happens after the process or program has been delivered. Formative evaluations tend to involve qualitative methods of data gathering and include, for example, needs assessments, conceptualizations, and process investigations. Summative evaluations rely more on quantitative data gathering and involve analysis of deliverables, outcomes, impacts, and cost effectiveness. A tool will emerge from this essay’s discussion. It will suggest the nature of key elements of an assessment associated with different library paradigms. To clarify the basis of differentiating the assessment pathways described in this essay, three perspectives on the library’s function will be briefly outlined, as well as the basic elements of applied research, which includes assessment. The assessment paths will be illustrated by examples from the literature, where identified, and a “meta assessment” framework will be suggested for interpreting the utility, feasibility, propriety, and accuracy of each assessment approach. The essay will conclude with a suggestion of areas not yet well covered in the literature and thus ripe for future research. Changing Library Paradigms Scott Bennett develops a compelling argument that the history of library space design reflects three distinct paradigms that he characterizes as reader, book, and learning centered. He illustrates the progression in the physical organization and appearance of libraries in terms of their corresponding purposes: to bring together readers and books in part by providing rooms needed for reading, reflection, and contemplation; to build and shelve large and growing collections; and to embrace the emerging opportunity to address the “transformational character of intentional learning” by “making learning happen” in the library [2]. These three perspectives on aligning library space with the role of the library loosely parallel an earlier service model that William Rando and I developed from empirical study of the impact of using digital images in the teaching of American studies. The service rubric identifies three levels of library service as collection building, information consulting, and knowledge transformation [3]. The role of the librarian (and by extension the mission of the library) evolves from these service levels to focus on acquiring, organizing, and preserving information resources; interpreting client needs and providing guidance to locate and access information to meet their individual requirements; and on building partnerships to maximize the institution’s ability to create and share knowledge in the service of research, teaching, and intellectual growth. In the model’s characterization, space explicitly appears only as an infrastructural requirement at the first service level, where it is essential for housing collections and records describing information with user accessibility. It becomes superseded in importance as an infrastructural requirement by retrieval and communication systems and by social and technological networks. The investigation and conceptualization of a future role of the library informed the redesign of a library at Yale University and the implementation of a Collaborative Learning Center within it that has become a popular virtual and physical environment for the exploration of learning activities and outcomes involving the library in partnership with educators and service providers interested in learning outside the classroom [4]. A predictive framework also emerged from examining changes in accreditation and assessments. Nearly a decade ago, Kathlin Ray [5] referenced the work of Ralph A. Wolff [6, p. 83] and placed four paradigms along a time frame representing a postmodern philosophical review of libraries. In her model, the library accentuated values at key moments in its history that emphasized resources or holdings (before 1980), access (1980), use by students (1995), and learning transformation (predicted for 2010). A nonprofit group, Ithaka, has conducted its Faculty Survey every three years since 2000, in which it has posed questions about the perceived importance of library functions among faculty in U.S. institutions offering bachelor and higher degrees [7]. The Ithaka researchers have longitudinal evidence for three traditional functions, which they label as “gateway” as a starting point for locating information for research, a “buyer” role that pays for information resources, and an “archive” function to preserve and keep track of resources [7, p. 8]. The 2009 survey introduced two additional roles with which to evaluate the impact of transformative services. Although still articulated as “support,” they introduce two roles of providing collaborative services, to facilitate teaching and to help increase the productivity of research and scholarship. A comparison of data from 2003, 2006, and 2009 surveys indicates that the importance of the gateway role has dropped, the archival role has stayed somewhat the same, and the buyer role has increased [7, p. 11]. In the latest survey, the newly introduced “teaching support” and “research support” are perceived as important library roles by equal numbers of respondents but far less frequently than those of the “buyer” and “archive” roles [7, p. 10]. Responses to specific questions about the starting point for faculty research also indicates the low importance given to the library building, with a steady drop in this perception over the decade of surveys. Coupled with a similar drop in already low importance given to the library’s catalog, the researchers observe that the role of the library to license network access is a technicality and behind the scenes and is not perceived as an important gateway function. Given the low response rate (8 percent) and potential imprecision of the definitions of roles, to make any generalizations about the importance that faculty place on library missions should be done with caution. However, this large-scale study highlights the transitional changes in the library paradigms and specifically the importance of its space. Collectively, these models suggest at least three distinct activity-based functions that define the library, whether viewed as its core mission or simply as acknowledged major coexisting roles. For purposes of this essay, these will be categorized as the role of accumulator (of books, equipment, and other information carriers), service provider (for retrieving information and borrowing materials, instruction, and other customer assistance for accessing knowledge), and facilitator (through the design of environments and the nurturing of relationships that foster self-directed learning and the creation of new knowledge). Changing Focus of Space Assessment Library spaces change slowly. But such changes among campus libraries are evident and follow planning and design processes that are at their best when informed by conceptualizations that articulate not only what to place within the space but also what will happen there as a result of interactions between people and their environment. Identifying both the content and the engagement of space is critical to its design. The paradigm shifts in the purpose of the library suggest different visualizations and requirements for these environments. The processes to assess (through formative research) the requirements of content and activity, as well as to evaluate (through summative research) the success of meeting the envisioned resulting library, will vary according to the paradigm of what the library is intended to be. To add to the complexity of the assessment challenge, changes in library spaces are seldom mutually exclusive of existing spaces, and thus assessments may need to factor overlapping intentions. Space also entails existing cultural expression of the social groups or individuals that come to environments to do something purposeful. Conceptualization of the symbolism, feelings, and identity, for example, embodied in the cultural meaning of specific environments (such as the associated elevated reverence for knowledge; the joy of learning; or the importance of concentration, comfort, and aesthetics) is important to the design of successful spaces [8]. Like space development, assessment itself is an evolving and flexible activity. The challenge is to adapt the proven assessment construct and techniques to understand and monitor space as an expression and enabler of the variations of what a library aims to be. Basic Elements of an Assessment Inquiry in library topics have most often followed the approach of applied research in the social sciences. Though there is no one universally accepted description of this approach, it is communicated through guidelines for research publication, dissertations, and sometimes reports of funded activities. Its seven common elements are briefly described here as suggestions for how to frame an assessment of library space. 1. A problem statement sets the context and purpose for which an assessment is undertaken. It should address four functions: The lead-in sets the stage and entices the reader (the stakeholders) to engage in communication of the assessment. An assertion of originality identifies the assessment’s uniqueness and how it will add to knowledge about the target of inquiry. Direction highlights the approach that the assessment will take to gain insights useful for taking action. Reflection on the significance of the assessment justifies why it should be undertaken and advocates the value its findings will provide decision makers to improve the library space. 2. A literature review is not only a process of identifying and reading publications on a topic; a good review synthesizes what is known about the focus of inquiry. For an assessment of library space, such a review should identify the insights already gained about elements of space and the functions they aim to address, the theoretical constructs that inform an understanding of the spatial manifestation of library programs and purpose, and the methods used to conduct assessments that might be helpful to replicate or modify in particular library settings. 3. The objectives for the assessment will generate specific questions to be addressed. Those objectives that aim to identify space needs or user perceptions, for example, will generate research questions, whereas assessments that seek to compare conditions or behaviors (e.g., with standards and benchmarked practices) might generate hypotheses. Most library space assessments are descriptive in nature and are guided by research questions, avoiding the need to apply inferential statistical analysis to hypothesized conditions. Questions may presuppose conditions for which space needs to be planned, such as, for example, “How much shelving will be required to house collections?” “What is the number of students at a given time that will need group presentation rooms, and how large are their study groups?” “What levels of light are needed for different library activities?” Forming the questions is critical to design a useful assessment. Questions are not merely posed to meet interest in using existing data or applying a convenient method for gathering new data but to provide specific directions to address the purpose of the assessment. 4. These first three elements influence the design of what will actually be done in conducting an assessment. Procedures and methodologies build on well-established and tested protocols for gathering reliable and valid data. Issues of implementation, such as the staffing and expertise needed to manage and undertake the project, timing when data gathering is least disruptive to users and staff (but when it also is most likely to yield meaningful results), and funding and other resources available to conduct the assessment, when addressed in this design planning stage, will improve the likelihood of generating useful results from the assessment effort. 5. Once conducted, the first step of handling the results of an assessment is to present the findings. The selection of how much and what to include in a report is dictated by the purpose of the study and also its stakeholders, considering the amount of time and effort they will have available to absorb the findings (whether through reading or listening). Selection and synthesis of what is most relevant to the problem and questions articulated earlier call for basic analytic and communication skills. Use of charts or tables, numbers or narratives, words or images, should be employed based on the organization’s culture, including the receptivity of stakeholders for data. At this stage, only the facts, without bias and interpretation, should be presented. 6. A discussion of the findings in response to the questions posed for the inquiry follows. Interpretation of the data gathered becomes evidence toward formulating insights about what is known. Data gathered, for example, about the way students use group study spaces have generated insights into unanticipated behaviors, such as a “study along,” a quiet but coexisting engagement among a group of students within library social spaces. The implications for designing areas should be discussed as a valuable outcome of the assessment. 7. Conclusions are not merely a summary of what was done and insights gained from an assessment. This closing section to the assessment report is where arguments for change or the confirmation of strategies underway are made. Next, actionable steps are recommended. The implications of “why bother” with assessment should be obvious in presenting the value of the effort. These steps and intentions frame applied research but are equally important to guide the practical efforts of developing information for responsible management. Making decisions with evidence is a wise strategy, especially whenever risks are high. Shaping library space, through new construction, renovation, or even minor adjustments to the placement of items (furniture, equipment, or people) within it, is among the most costly managerial activities that library administrators face. This requires investment of time, political capital, and funds that are seldom insignificant. The investment costs are relatively high, and their worth is judged by resulting returns. A major assumption in thinking about the importance of assessment of space on not only delivery of library services but also on demonstrating the vision of the academic library revolves around the value that this evidence offers in decision making. Thus, the effort to plan and the discipline to execute an assessment approach that will generate relevant evidence should be grounded in tested practices. The assessment of library spaces turns to the practices of experts in the design and construction of architecture, in marketing and the improvement of service quality, and in the education of learning and in the creation of new knowledge. Paths to Assessing Library Space This essay asserts that, depending on the perspective of what the library intends to be, the approach to assessing the requirements or success of its space will be different. To explore this proposition, this section reviews adaptations of the first four core elements of an assessment suited for the three perspectives on the role of the library. For each perspective, an attempt is made to identify the core purpose for an assessment (highlighted in problem statements), some unique challenges in understanding spatial elements associated with the library role (emerging from the review of literature and observed practice), illustrative questions to address in the assessment approach, and procedures and methodologies useful to address them. Academic libraries are not standardized but rather are customized to embrace their role in their college or university’s culture and enterprise of education, research, public service, and management of relations with the multitude of their stakeholders. One possible consequence of this uniqueness, combined with the formative stage of library space assessments, is that it is difficult to uncover uniform or definitive conclusions about how space design supports libraries in their provision of services. Literature reviews conclude that little exists about best practices or recommended approaches for evaluating library spaces [9] or their relation to learning [10]. Traditional advice about planning and designing a library, without filtering for the library paradigm, is to begin with a “needs assessment” of the library’s services. Data gathered from this assessment provide the basis for the design process. There are numerous guides on this process, particularly for public libraries, where taxpayers and trustees require extensive justification for the expenditure of public funds [11]. The size and type of collections projected for decades in the future, the demographics of populations expected to be served, and the structural requirements of a public building are among the types of topics addressed. Analysis of the data gathered includes pricing options and forming value judgments in recommendations about whether to build new or remodel old spaces and about the extent to which value will be gained in doing so. Such planning exercises prior to space designing are important assessments for data-based decision making among responsible administrators. This approach to an assessment of public libraries may be grounded in a more commonly held and consistent perspective of the role of the library than is found among academic libraries. Attempts at articulating standards for academic library buildings tend to be general and not precise enough to inform design or to account for investment in construction. The Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL), for example, provides general statements about facilities that guide requirements for libraries in academic settings: “The library facility and its branches should be well planned; it should provide secure and adequate space, conducive to study and research with suitable environmental conditions for its services, personnel, resources and collections. The library’s equipment should be adequate and functional” [12]. Similary among the ten questions posed in these ACRL standards to consider in assessment, three are interspersed and relate to the functions of a building, regardless of the program it houses: “Are building mechanical systems properly designed and maintained to control temperature and humidity at recommended levels? … Is there enough space for current library collections and future growth of print resources? … Are electrical and network wiring sufficient to meet the needs associated with electronic access?” [12]. The actual results of assessments, the discoveries about space requirements or criteria adapted to design spaces in specific libraries, will be noted only to the extent that they suggest generalized insights contributing to knowledge about the contribution of space in fulfilling the library role. In its formative stages, research design for library space assessment is frequently exploratory in nature, and results cannot be generalized beyond the case studied. Thus, results will not be reviewed in detail here; some sources identify general findings [13]. Similarly, reporting strategies to utilize the findings in managerial decision making to improve library spaces will also be omitted from this discussion of pathways to space assessments. In general, the details of how space accommodates a library’s program are locally determined when and if an assessment is undertaken. With most contracted projects, building construction concludes with an assessment of the project, identifying through “punch lists” of items not delivered to specification the areas that require adjustments to the facilities. Such assessments are not unique to the library program, though some guides for librarians include advice on a slightly expanded architect’s “post-occupancy evaluation” that returns to satisfaction while supporting the program objectives. William Sannwald, for example, with varying degree of detail about this “process of diagnosing the technical, functional, and behavioral aspects of a completed building in order to accommodate information for future programming and design activities,” devotes a chapter in the different editions of his Checklist of Library Building Design Considerations [14, p. 195]. The factors considered revolve around contractual and business obligations, such as the completion of the building project on time and within budget, the architect and contractors’ performances and responsiveness, and the degree of delivery and adjustments made to meet the library’s program. Though desirable, few library building projects include Sannwald’s recommended final evaluation factors that answer the following questions: was the building • planned and designed to reinforce the library as a center of the campus or community? • designed to provide for comfort and health as well as safety and security of the campus or community? • designed to make effective use of all available resources? • designed to address changing library needs over time by permitting flexibility and adaptability? [14, p. 197] These assessment factors suggest a focus on the impact of the space on the library. Compared with the earlier noted general “standards” for facilities or elements of “needs assessment,” these implied questions of impact become clearer depending on the different perspectives regarding the library’s purpose. Here, three such core library functions will be reviewed—accumulating knowledge, providing services, and fostering learning. Space for Accumulation The metaphor of libraries as warehouses for the artifacts of knowledge has a long and rich history in defining the academic library. The most famous library buildings include spatial solutions to house vast collections. Examples can be found in accounts of the ancient library of King Ashurbanipal in the city of Nineveh, where in the 600s BCE tens of thousands of cuneiform tablets were housed in organized fashion, or where seventh-century Chinese stored the Buddhist scripture in caves at the Yunju Temple, preserved on tens of thousands of stone tablets for over a thousand years. More modern visions of a great library have been set by such famous examples as the Library of Congress, the British Museum, or the French National Library, each handsomely providing space for “stacks” of shelving to house organized collections of physical books, journals, and other formats of accumulated collections of information resources. The need for shelving books offers an opportunity to design beautiful façades and architectural detailing that helps establish the important and central role of a library on a campus. In his insightful review of the history of library architecture at Yale University, the architect Robert A. M. Stern acknowledges the potential institutional importance that a building offers to both the library and the university. As he points out, the first building to solely house books and readers elevated the “University Library to the status of a department equal to other academic departments” [15, p. 17]. Furthermore, the design intentionally deviated from the common red brick Georgian style that had become associated with the utilitarianism of New England mills to the Gothic style, seen by some as “an antidote to utilitarianism but also as a means … to construct a building with ‘pretensions to architectural beauty,’” as assessed by a contemporary who was also a former Yale student (Lyman Hotchkiss Bagg, class of 1869) [15, p. 17]. The assessment of this associated role of the library as an icon to the historic purpose of housing books for people to read may be gauged in part by expressions of donor support, as fund-raising for library buildings includes naming opportunities and places to exhibit the appreciation and endearment of generous benefactors to the university. But this aesthetic luxury gave way to other constructions where the function to house collections drove design. During the past quarter century, for example, the requirements for massive housing, primarily of print materials, have been studied and applied to the design of facilities dedicated to the efficient use of space to shelve organized collections in environments conducive to their long-term preservation—typically off campus or on less valued real estate than a reader-oriented library. The Harvard University Library Depository established the best-practice model for numerous off-campus, high-efficiency shelving facilities for infrequently used research materials. Yale University, the Library of Congress, and the collaboration among Princeton and Columbia universities with the New York Public Library are but a few institutions that followed and improved this model. It defines library space focused on this classic accumulation function without special concern for the overlapping intentions of bringing readers and books together in that space. As these facilities evolved, problems requiring research addressed issues of preservation as well as the delivery of materials to readers no longer proximate to the collections. As Paul Conway observes, commitment to preservation is what distinguished this library building type from warehouses. He suggests a corollary to the accumulator paradigm by envisioning the “library building as a preservation tool” in his detailed discussion of the basic experimental science and practical experience methods undertaken to understand the relationship of temperature and relative humidity, as well as other environmental factors such as light, pollution, and particulates. Furthermore, he extends the inquiry to the care and handling of materials to transport them to and from the reader [16]. Research continues in experimental settings to identify other issues of space housing, such as fire monitoring and suppression, particularly in examining the requirements for using water or gas and the associated fire rating of materials surrounding condensed masses of paper [17]. The problems driving assessment under this paradigm have become those of physics, material science, and operations, with such questions as How secure are buildings to withstand earthquakes? What distancing of sprinkler valves will provide needed response to fire? What effect do different levels and types of lighting have on print materials? What are the set points of temperature and relative humidity that will extend the life of the book furthest in time? What amount of cleaning to remove particulates from incoming books offers the most preservation? Staff responsible for shelving (whether in specialized off-site facilities or in traditional campus library stacks) are constantly monitoring the occupancy of shelves to determine needs for shifting collections and the projection for “filling” shelves. Some of these problems have been researched through experimental tests, and the resulting best practices offer standards against which to gauge a library’s success, such as an 80–85 percent occupancy maximum for circulating collections. Methods to gather data to assess a particular library’s success rely on measurements, using sampling and collection growth projections and statistical analysis to gather information vital for making managing decisions regarding the library as a responsible accumulator with adequate amounts of dedicated space [18]. Assessment in the context of the library’s role as an accumulator of collections is of interest to a limited group of persons who manage, fund, or possibly leverage the library for other institutional purposes. Operational staffs wish to have information about the rate of growth and the corresponding amount of space needed to house collections. Library administrators similarly need to gauge the projected time frame when new space needs to be acquired or collections need to be located elsewhere. Administrators will also want to be aware of the cost implications of space management, and some may be assessing the return on investment into aesthetics of the space by measuring the associated donor response to build new or renovate old spaces. Space for Service In the past two decades or so, academic libraries have taken a new focus on the use of physical space, trading collection shelving for more seating for readers and sometimes upgrading these public work areas with technologies and equipment. Accompanying this shift has been an increased awareness of the library as a service organization, with ambitions to not only meet but to exceed “customer” expectations. The purpose of providing high-quality service calls for a different set of questions and methods to gather data than does the inquiry about the physicality of placing objects in space. Perceptions become at least as important as reality, and those served become key judges of success and carry opinions that sometimes are more relevant than those held by the experts who are designing and delivering the services. Questions include the self-reporting of attitudes about the degree to which the library service meets expectations for excellence (service quality) and the reaction to a specific service transaction (satisfaction). Customer-based assessments of service quality are a highly developed topic in marketing. The SERVQUAL is a survey-based questionnaire designed to measure Gap 5 in the Gap Model of Service Quality, which defines service quality as the difference between client expectation for excellence and perception of delivered service. The instrument identifies expectations and perceptions from the responses to interval scale ratings of a set of statements about various factors repeatedly identified through empirical research in a range of service industries as being important to customers in their judgment of service quality. Research undertaken in the early 1990s tested the applicability of this methodology to libraries [19, 20], and its one statement relating to space was about a perception of safety. Researchers from Texas A&M working with the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) undertook to design an instrument based on this construct of service quality but more specifically focused on library settings. The resulting LibQUAL+ has become an internationally used tool to gauge customer-perceived service quality. The “library as place” emerged as an important factor from research undertaken over several years. Five statements related to this factor, including characterizations as “space that inspires study and learning,” “quiet space for individual activities,” “a comfortable and inviting location,” “a getaway for study, learning or research,” and “community space for group learning and group study” [21].2 As a result of the tool’s popularity, assessment of space from the customer’s perspective has entered the library culture. Other tools are available for gathering feedback from library visitors, including the LibSat, an online questionnaire managed by Counting Opinions, which is used along with its SQUIRE Index to compute responses from customers about a range of services [22]. The full-view survey includes a specific set of questions about the library’s facilities, with requests for satisfaction ratings and levels of importance for parking; hours of access; accessibility; seating and work spaces; restrooms; personal safety; security of personal belongings, as well as library materials; and the “library building,” in general. In addition, another group of questions focuses specifically on equipment. Space assessment is conducted in this marketing context as a cumulative view of individualized perceptions of a facility and its aesthetics, arrangement for quiet studying or socializing, security, and overall ambiance. The perceptions sought by assessments are similar to those of other marketed environments, essentially answering questions about the customer’s satisfaction revolving around the following types of queries: “Does this place meet your expectations for what a library should look like?” “How comfortable are you in it?” “Do you like it?” And maybe even, “What does it do for you?” The other shift toward the service purpose of the library came with the emphasis on providing equipment to support research, teaching, and study. The 1990s saw the introduction of the “information commons,” described as “designated spaces in libraries with additional technology that support student learning” [23, p. 183]. This model initially continues a somewhat passive nature of service, in which success is measured by use of the space—now equipped with more than collections, with seating to consult or read them, along with equipment to retrieve electronic resources and use software for schoolwork incorporating information. Assessments of information commons look to address the investment in technologies and changing the library offerings by addressing such questions as “How many students use the [new] equipment/space/services?” “What resources are accessed from the commons?” “What happens in the space?” These problems focus on assessing the space as a destination, with marketable attractiveness, but also as the venue for activities. The service responsibility of the library to provide access to information is manifested in part by the presence of information commons, including equipment and, increasingly, assistance from librarians and technologists. The presence of the library on the Web introduces new assessments of “space.” Many of the same questions are posed, such as “How many come to Web sites and from where?” “What do they use?” “Are they satisfied?” But assessment of virtual spaces places greater emphasis than assessment of physical spaces to understand the ease of using the library. Usability testing, including observations, talk aloud protocol, problem solving, transaction log analysis, and interviews are common methodologies for gathering data about the “digital” library. Initial findings reinforce the roles of the library for storing materials accumulated and for social interactions [24]. Gauging market penetration relies on the traditions of counting “use” with the “more is better” benchmark. Libraries have relied on measuring surrogates to actual use by counting the number of items borrowed, passages through entry or exit gates and, in Web environments, the number of “hits” or downloads. Counters on equipment or software provide data-gathering mechanisms and generate circulation system data and security gate or turnstile counts, for example. Methods to project who comes into the “digital library” have evolved and include, for example, the MINES for Libraries protocol whereby randomly generated instances of point-of-use survey questions gather information about who uses what and for what purpose from the customer’s perspective [25]. Data gathering to assess the success of information commons has augmented use (counts of how many people visit the space and, sometimes, counts of use of its equipment) with the evolving reliance on satisfaction perceptions. Methodologies used include observations and sometimes transaction log analysis for counting use and describing behavior, as well as surveys and interviews (growing with focus groups) for gauging satisfaction and perceptions of service quality. Access to materials continues to be a major service goal of libraries. This function occasionally influences the assessment of the library as a place. For example, the Best Colleges Online review of the “25 Most Modern Libraries in the World” primarily highlights public and national libraries with fascinating architecture. However, its entry for one academic library, Pace University Library, applauds its innovations in providing access in conjunction with its physical facilities: This university library in New York has made it easier than ever to get access to library materials. The library was granted the Library of the Future award for an innovative media network it has implemented. An internal streaming system called MediaPatch allows the library to share various types of media across campuses quickly and easily, allowing patrons at one branch to access the resources from another at the touch of a button. This solves several copyright concerns as the information never leaves the school’s secure servers but still allows distance learners and those in the classroom to quickly and easily access information. The library also participates in a podcasting program designed to cover a variety of subjects [26]. Testimony to the access function as extended to the Internet is found in reactions among participants to Google Books, becoming the world’s largest library in some people’s minds. It offers the link to the library’s facilitation role but is still grounded in the concept of a service provider and accumulator of resources. The new “transformative” role of the library, as suggested by Barbara McFadden Allen, director of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation, is driven by access capabilities and reaches beyond the boundaries of physical space. As she notes, “we’re opening up these resources as both a common good shared among the universities, as well as a public good available more broadly” [27]. Or as James Neal, university librarian and vice president for information services at Columbia University, projects the results of the Google initiative, it “will enable the Libraries to make available more significant portions of its extraordinary archival and special collections to scholars and researchers worldwide in ways that will ultimately change the nature of scholarship” [27]. Evaluating such access, specifically of Google Books, revolves around perceptions of convenience, time savings, discovery, and fairness in paying for use of copyrighted materials [28] as well as product-quality issues such as legibility [29]. The very discovery of such assessments in an institutional repository identifies some of the questions that are seen as important for marketing use or possibly for gauging value: “What can ScholarSpace (the library space on the Web) do for you?” “What can it do for the university?” The variables for assessing this virtual library space are implied by its goals, for example, to “increase impact of faculty research,” “showcase the university’s research output,” and “house digitized collections” [30]. Space for Learning The third function of the library, as a facilitator of learning beyond the classroom, is not universally adopted but during the past decade has been enthusiastically implemented in numerous libraries. It has been associated with changing space needs to support principles of active or intentional learning, the utilization of information, and the requirement for collaboration, whether among students, with faculty or staff, or across different disciplines. Multiple types of spaces appear to accommodate quiet solitary reflection, noisy group study, focused conversations between a student (or group) and a specialist in information or technology, along with a teacher or tutor at times. The shift from the “information commons” to the “learning commons” is another framework for changes in space design. This shift has been documented in publications, on Web sites, and at conferences [31–33]. Information commons as a description of a library space has evolved into more than an assemblage of equipment and service support for using technology within the library. The concept overlaps with the construct of a “learning commons,” introduced about a decade ago [33]. Melanie Remy characterizes “learning commons” as having the following distinction: “Its mission [is] not merely to integrate technology, reference … and services but to facilitate learning by whatever means works best. As a library service environment, the Learning Commons will enable students to develop a framework to understand and evaluate the impact of information technology on the choices they make as researchers and practitioners. As a bridge to the classroom, it will create the conditions in which students engage critically with information, see themselves as active participants in the production of knowledge, and continue that participation far beyond their university experience” [34, p. 5]. Summarizing responses to a survey in 2008 about providing learning and research initiatives and spaces from seventy-seven ARL libraries, Crit Stuart acknowledged the similar appearance of learning commons characterized by “improved furnishings and aesthetics coupled with computer workstations arranged in an open landscape. Service points were tailored to provide information and technology assistance to undergraduates” [32, p. 8]. Some interpret this orientation to be the future defining purpose of the academic library as a partner for learning, especially beyond the classroom. To facilitate this role, those who teach in the classroom and guide learners also have a stake in the resulting designs of this evolving library space. Stuart also observes that “a minority of libraries reported modeling their innovative learning spaces [for undergraduates] on user-derived data, interviews, and insights,” even though by contrast “the most successful iterations of these research-oriented facilities [for graduate students and faculty] are predicated on a deep understanding of the client, informed by careful pre-programming assessment that engages the library, partners, faculty, and graduate students in discovery and insight” [32, p. 8]. He confirms the impression that “assessment of built learning and research spaces is sporadic and often anecdotal. Many libraries report that the most salient statistics are found in the numbers of individuals who visit and work in these arenas. Formal mission and vision statements are sometimes lacking. Perhaps the most telling omission is the dearth of identified learning outcomes that meet faculty aspirations for students coupled with a nuanced understanding of the principal hurdles faced by students in their major disciplines” [32, p. 8]. This group of libraries illustrates similar themes in what appears in their innovative spaces, which include collaboration with campus partners, multimedia, faculty and graduate student spaces, flexible user-influenced spaces, classrooms, galleries, performances, tutoring and peer support, cafés and refreshments, and presentation practice facilities [32, pp. 8–9]. Although faculty and graduate students are more outspoken about their expectations for physical library spaces to support their research and contemplative needs, Stuart points out that there is no consensus of what these spaces should be [32, p. 17]. Yet, assessment of the relation of space to learning is not often reported, if conducted at all. Assessments and evaluations are reported for information commons that consist of counting the number of groups studying in the library as an indication of successful collaboration, a characteristic shared by both information and learning commons [35]. An earlier SPEC survey conducted by the ARL identifies the following methodologies used to collect data on twenty-two information commons and the number of times each was selected among the respondents: Statistics on service transactions or users 14 Informal feedback from users 12 Formal paper-based evaluation survey 8 Computer-based survey 7 Focus group (interview) 2 Point of use computer pop-up survey 1 Other (observations; staff feedback; one day, paper-based survey) 3 [36, p. 42] These methodologies, however, do not address the impact of space on learning. These paths to gather data might identify activities occurring in the space and the satisfaction or perceptions of service quality gained from engaging with services offered in the space. These are not methods to measure what is learned, though they could be used to gauge the activities surrounding learning. In this context, assessment now becomes the interest of not only those who manage and administer space but also those who engage with learning. Intentional learning calls for the learner to take responsibility for the learning process and achieving change in knowledge. Assessment questions become more complex with inquiry seeking an understanding beyond the library’s input (e.g., the objects to be housed in the space and the space’s appeal factors) and beyond the library’s output (e.g., the number of visitors to the space or their satisfaction with it). Outcomes are becoming central to a variety of stakeholders who seek accountability, expecting answers to such questions as “How does the library as a place affect student capacity to learn?” “How does it affect the creation of new knowledge, whether at novice levels of student learning or at levels of scholarship that then is distributed and preserved?” There is very little formal assessment of learning that happens in learning commons or other library spaces. The purpose of assessments of activities within libraries has generally involved evaluations of library instructional services or usability of Web sites and retrieval systems. The latter is less about the changes in the user of the Web than it is in the functionality and characteristics of the site or its navigational structures to retrieve information. As Delia Neumann concludes in her examination of the literature on “learning with information,” “the field of information studies has not focused on learning as a goal of information seeking” [37]. As she points out, various information-seeking models, including those developed in educational settings, “stop short of making a direct connection between information use and learning.” It may very well be that the relationships of space to learning, especially if seeking a causal correlation, pose a set of questions that are difficult, if not impossible, to assess. Learning is ultimately a highly individualized change in personal knowledge. It will not be understood out of context of the individual learner’s experiences, prior knowledge, motivations, and processing of data. Perhaps the best we can hope for is to assess the learning experience both in terms of what supports activities and what learners perceive is happening in their environment and changing in themselves. Neumann proposes an I-LEARN model to link information seeking to learning, and its six categories reflect steps of the experience of learning but not the outcome of the process of learning. Thus, assessing the impact of space on learning is difficult for a number of reasons. There is no generally accepted theoretical framework that identifies the effects of environment on people. Furthermore, it is difficult to separate influences of space from other variables such as prior experience, personal distractions or stress, or styles of learning. Amos Rapoport has evolved a number of models to clarify components of environment to analyze an activity that occurs within a space. These include four descriptive components (with illustration added to suggest application to learning): 1. The activity proper (e.g., learning as the processing of information to create new knowledge); 2. Specific ways of doing it and where it is done (e.g., reading and reflecting within a library); 3. Additional adjacent or associated activities (e.g., socializing, eating, or listening to music); 4. Symbolic aspects and meaning of the activity (e.g., behaving intellectually and joining the ranks of educated citizenry). [38, p. 17] Architects and space designers contracted to build learning environments associate the importance of pedagogy’s influence on space design both programmatically and symbolically. The space is becoming the embodiment of community, as one environmental designer, notes: “By space I don’t just mean classroom, I mean learning community: classrooms, labs, libraries, interaction spaces, maybe residential spaces. … My frame of thinking about this is that pedagogy drives (or at least should drive) physical environment. So I am thinking about futurist pedagogy—and the physical space needs that implies. I am also thinking about my University’s community service mission—and how we might intersect learning spaces with community development spaces” [39]. To analyze the impact of space on the specific activity of learning, a clarification of learning outcomes might offer a basis for identifying measurable variables. Peter C. Honebein proposes seven pedagogical goals for designing constructivist learning environments. These suggest what about the activity is expected to occur in a successful learning space: 1. Provide experience with the knowledge construction process, encouraging students to take primary responsibility for determining the topics or subtopics they pursue, the methods of how to learn, and the strategies or methods for solving problems. 2. Provide experience in and appreciation for multiple perspectives so that students recognize that the real world has multiple ways to frame and solve problems. 3. Embed learning in realistic and relevant contexts to balance the removal from the classroom of the noise of real life. 4. Encourage ownership and voice in the learning process, emphasizing student centeredness. 5. Embed learning in social experience, recognizing that intellectual development is significantly influenced through social interactions. 6. Encourage the use of multiple modes of representations, creating rich experiences by expanding beyond the most common oral and written channels and adopting additional media, such as video, automation, photographs, geospatial representation, and sound. 7. Encourage self awareness of the knowledge construction process, developing student[s’] reflexivity and their ability to explain why or how they solve a problem in a certain way and to analyze their construction of knowledge and processes. [40, p. 12] Assessing the success of achieving these goals sometimes has been addressed in evaluations of information literacy instruction. However, examples of doing so within the context of library spaces have not been discovered. A study of the impact or effects of environment on people, as Rapoport suggests, relates the particular organization of space, time, meaning, and communication on human behavior, well being, or mood. From such frameworks about the goals of teaching, an assessment might be designed to gather data about the extent to which learning activity goals are met. For example, metrics might include the number of group studying sessions, the amount of time spent undertaking activities in a given space, or the use of media in student presentations, each measured in relation to specifically identified areas, arrangements of furniture, or types of light. Findings might be useful in a formative evaluation for preparation of designing environments that can offer cues for behavior. They might be less reliable, however, in any predictive role of projecting successful activities within spaces or the contribution of space to achieving learning outcomes. Measuring or even just identifying the influence of environments on learning outcomes remains a messy assessment challenge. Part of the messiness is a result of the overlapping functions housed in a library and imprecise descriptions of the targets of the library’s assessment. A framework and research design for assessing the alignment between the design of informal learning spaces with institutional values and missions is evolving through the research that Scott Bennett is undertaking [41]. He links questions related to effective education and learning experiences with student and faculty perceptions about their favored learning spaces. In the first phase of his project, he suggests six questions that colleges or universities should answer during the design of learning spaces, some of which are built in libraries: 1. What is it about the learning that will happen in this space that compels us to build a bricks and mortar learning space, rather than rely on a virtual one? 2. How might this space be designed to encourage students to spend more time studying and working more productively? 3. For what position on the spectrum from isolated study to collaboration study should this learning space be designed? 4. How will claims to authority over knowledge be managed by the design of this space? What will this space affirm about the nature of knowledge? 5. Should this space be designed to encourage student/teaching exchanges outside of the classroom? 6. How might this space enrich education experiences? [42] Through online questionnaires, Bennett separately surveys faculty and students to identify their perceptions of what learning behaviors are important, how well their campus physical spaces support these behaviors, and where best these behaviors happen. He framed his inquiry on twelve learning behaviors identified from the National Survey of Student Engagement [43]. The model of a gap analysis allows for assessment of these campus stakeholders’ assessment of space quality, echoing the service perspective to evaluate spaces. In addition, Bennett surveyed ninety-one college and university libraries in the United States, mostly small and medium-sized institutions, which were identified as having created spaces for collaboration among academic support staff. A respectable response from sixty-six institutions provides information to complement the ARL study. The majority (88 percent) of respondents indicated that such spaces were located in library buildings [44, p. 6]. Similar features of a common space were identified as among the ARL libraries, including group study, tables for collaborative work, student academic services, workstations, peer advising, and a combined technology and research help desk [44, p. 16]. Importance is ranked highest among respondents, both faculty and students, for spaces aiming to foster learning behaviors that were to support “conversations with students with different values,” “discussions of readings outside of class,” “conversations with students of different race[s],” “group study,” “discussions of readings with faculty outside of class,” and “culminating senior experiences” [44, p. 21]. Of these behaviors, those most commonly perceived to be well supported were “discussions of readings with faculty outside of class” and “culminating senior experiences” [44, p. 23]. Bennett cites others who are thoughtfully interested in framing the design of learning spaces in conjunction with asking the right first questions. Jeanne Narum, director of Project Kaleidoscope, observes that too often, planning for new spaces for undergraduate teaching in science and mathematics begins with the wrong questions. Sometimes the initial misstep occurs when faculty say “we do not have enough space—we need more room for faculty, for students, for equipment.” Questions about size—“How many square feet per faculty member, per major, per department do you need?”—often surface in response to such demands. … These are important questions, they need to be addressed. However when they shape the initial stages of planning, the process is skewed. You will not end up with the building that you need, that your students deserve. [45] She further concludes, “Questions about the nature of the educational experience—about quality and the nature of the learning community—are questions that must be asked first and asked persistently throughout the process, and indeed before and beyond the process of planning a facility” [45]. Mary M. Somerville has described the use of a collaborative codesign process utilized at San Jose State University and California Polytechnic State University that involved both students and faculty in the design of library spaces [46]. The information/learning commons originally were built to advance formal learning experiences and to support teaching beyond the classroom. As a result of action research using a variety of methods, such as online surveys, focus group interviews, and participant observations, student engagement identified different expanded roles of these spaces. The student perspective urged the inclusion of interactive communities using Web 2.0 tools. Among the resulting changes to the spaces was a provision for virtual reality production technologies to allow students to work alongside faculty, librarians, instructional designers, and technology experts. A café proposal included not only access to food and drink but also to gaming opportunities for relaxation and learning. Assessments of space and learning behaviors utilized not only the growing popular data-gathering methodologies of surveys, interviews, and observation but also incorporated the practices of the pedagogies involved in learning itself, such as using three-dimensional modeling, prototyping, and applications of narrative. The evolution of the learning commons at Cal Poly illustrates the “learning through doing” intention to go beyond the engagement of information and knowledge creation to embrace the full range of social dimensions involved in collaborative learning that, in turn, promotes critical thinking and content expertise among students and faculty. As the space design responds to the awareness of the environment needed to facilitate this fully engaged learning, library space spreads beyond the physical boundaries of its facility to integrate activities within virtual spaces as well. As Donald Beagle observes, Somerville’s “collaborative codesign techniques … have perhaps not received the same level of attention as has the ethnographic approach popularized by Foster and Gibbons … although the two are not mutually exclusive” [33, p. 14]. The library role of facilitator of learning calls for a changing role of its librarian and fellow partners. The introduction of this role has been articulated as the “blended librarian” [47–49], “embedded librarian” [50], or “informationist” [51]. The Welch Medical Library at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine has articulated on its Web site the change of the subject of clinical and public health “liaison” librarians, who provide traditional services of troubleshooting access issues, building collections, answering questions, and conducting literature searches. In addition to these services, these informationists will be much better positioned to offer on-the-spot instruction/consultation and searching, creating digital portals for you, develop Web 2.0 forums on your departmental sites, participate on systematic review teams, and collaborate on your projects as they evolve. To foster our relationships, we may ask to attend your open activities such as grand rounds and seminars, and to present our services at one of your departmental meetings … we work with you to assess your information needs, we may suggest any or all of the following: holding set “office hours” somewhere in your research or clinical space; participating in your journal club or case/residents’ conference; participating on some of your committees. We’re excited to be part of your team! [51] The work of the librarian, or perhaps more descriptively renamed informationist, occurs in spaces other than the library building. The success of the library’s ability to accomplish its role of partnering with the medical faculty and students will be meaningful through the academic outcomes rather than the facility of its administration. Summarizing a Work in Progress The assessment of how space contributes to a library’s ability to meet its mission is a relatively new area of inquiry (see table 1). The paths to conduct such an inquiry are dependent on which of the evolving library roles are of interest. The traditional function of a library to accumulate materials has established methods by which space needs to house the gathered collections are quantified. Standards and best practices for shelving materials and for seating readers of those materials have developed as libraries for years have been built to support this mission. The emphasis on providing service, especially to access information, has introduced a renewed interest in library assessment. Seeking input from the beneficiary of the services, the customers, has expanded the largely quantitative approach to measuring space into the use of qualitative methods. Interest in assessment of the perceptions of space became one of several factors that carry a marketing interest for gauging service quality delivery. Through both of these library functions—accumulation and service—space is an important means for achieving the library’s goals and to judge its success. Table 1.  Factors Affecting Assessment of Space in Support of Different Library Roles Library Role Accumulation Service Facilitation Space need House objects, primarily physical materials (books, journals, films, archive boxes) Respond to customer expectations of convenient and easy access; hours of opening, comfort, appropriate lighting, etc. Offer individual work spaces, group study areas, presentation and rehearsal facilities; convenience of reserving or using spaces alone, with peers, or with an assortment of expert help (information, technology, writing) Physical space expression Shelving, preservation environments Attractive study areas, including well-equipped and staffed information commons Diverse learning environments Virtual space contributors Repository for digital resources; server and telecommunications adequate for storage and use of owned and licensed electronic resources Identification of available resources; remote access from anywhere, anytime Potential use of social networking to extend learning with persons (peers and expert supporters) in different geographic proximity Assessment Of operations Of service quality and satisfaction Of learning behaviors, collaborative engagement, and learning outcomes Perspective Staff managing housing Customer satisfaction Learners’ perceived growth; educators’ perceived support Time frame for impact Long term Immediate Ongoing Problem Project space needs for collection growth; understand preservation environment Gauge what expectations are and what is needed to maintain high perceptions of service delivery Align space with learning objectives and foster communities of learners and knowledge partners Assessment objectives Ensure a secure preservation environment to extend the life of materials for current and future generations of users Attract and maintain customers by providing high-quality services Offer learners the means to build confidence and monitor accomplishment of information-handling competencies and skills, as well as lifelong learning habits Sample research questions and hypotheses What is the projected growth of collections? How many linear feet of shelving are needed? What space for staff and equipment is needed to process and service the collections? What is important for ideal service? How well is service delivered? What spatial factors contribute most to improving service quality? How many people simultaneously use different work spaces and areas? How much time is spent in different learning spaces (from isolated to group study)? What encourages students and faculty to engage in conversations and explore information in the space? What will enrich the education experience for students? Methods Generally quantitative: counting through sampling; statistical analysis; experimental testing of factors such as light, water, humidity, and temperature on deterioration of materials Mix of qualitative and quantitative: interviews, surveys, mystery shopper, observation Mix of qualitative and quantitative: counting, observations, and transaction analysis to address objectives of housing and balancing different objects, which, in this role, involves people, furniture, and equipment; count time spent and number and types of groups engaged with information within spaces; formative evaluation to improve design; ethnographic techniques (observation, visualization, usability, talk aloud) to understand learning behaviors; content analysis of student portfolios Use of data Generalize and establish standards for design and evaluation Local application is most meaningful for diagnostic purposes Local application for designing space; personalized feedback to learner to encourage growth The relationship of space to the library’s expanded role as a partner in learning, a facilitator of knowledge creation, is less clear. Learning is individualized. There are no commonly held specifications for environments that are necessary for it to occur. A person might be in any of a number of places—libraries included, but not necessarily—to engage in learning activities. It seems unrealistic, if not meaningless, to assess the impact of space on learning as an outcome. However, as partners in supporting the activities of learning, libraries are drawn to assess what happens in their spaces, with their facilities, and as a result of their staff’s engagement. These seem to offer a basis of assessment efforts about library space. A summary of the relationships between the three functions of academic libraries and assessment issues is offered in table 1. It is an initial attempt to summarize the issues raised in thinking about space assessment. It is a work in progress and invites critique and debate. This summary does not imply any intention to prescribe a single model of conducting an assessment of library space. This essay asserts that multiple paths may be taken to conduct such assessments. A good assessment plan should be assessed itself for the usability of its results. Such a “meta assessment” is suggested through John Ory’s adaptation of standards for judging an evaluation developed by educators. He suggests standards organized into four factors important to the evaluation of assessment activities: utility, feasibility, proprietary, and accuracy [52]. Consideration of the assessment’s utility includes identification of the audience for its results, the credibility of its evaluator, the scope and selection of information, the protocols for interpreting results, the report (its clarity, dissemination, timeliness), and the impact of the assessment. Feasibility standards include consideration of practical procedures, political viability, and cost effectiveness. Numerous standards guide the assessment’s propriety, intended to ensure legal, ethical, and responsive conduct. These include such issues as the assessment’s formal obligations, conflict of interest, full and frank disclosure, the public’s right to know, rights of human subjects, human interactions, balanced (complete and fair) reporting, and fiscal responsibility. Finally, consideration of the assessment’s accuracy is intended to guide delivery of adequate information about the object studied that will determine its worth or merit. Among the issues considered are the identification of the object (as a program, project, activity), context analysis, description of purpose and procedures, defensible information sources, valid and reliable measurements, systematic data control, appropriate analysis of quantitative and qualitative information, justified conclusions, and objective reporting. As with any well-done applied research, these elements of design procedures and execution should be addressed to improve the likelihood of the assessment to be responsibly completed and worthwhile and to ensure that its results will be valid, reliable, and accurate. Further Research Topics Inquiry at the intersection of assessment and library space is dependent on the nature of the library role and the purpose of the research. There are a variety of research topics raised in the literature [32, pp. 17–18] that might be grouped into five broad topics: 1. Relation of space and learning: What is the relationship between space and cognitive development or “deep learning”? How will critical student learning outcomes be identified and realized in these learning spaces? What new staff roles provided by both the library and campus partners are required to support and deliver the agenda of these spaces? 2. Economic return on space investment: Are library learning spaces a factor in student decisions to remain in a college? Do these spaces influence original decisions to select a college? How much do library spaces and opportunities to name them influence donor contributions? 3. Integration with other academic functions: Are library learning spaces unique? Does their proximity to other library resources such as collections, staff, and equipment relate to their effectiveness in supporting learning? How does the library’s Web presence relate to its physical spaces in support of learning? In providing access to information services? How will the information mission of the library be complemented and informed by these learning spaces? 4. Planning space design: How might more libraries benefit from user-centered assessment applied to the design and programming phases of new learning spaces? How will libraries create and improve learning spaces to address the specific needs of local constituents without falling into the trap of simply emulating what others have done, thus missing an opportunity for the library to engage the larger learning and research agendas of its institution? What are best practices and effective methods of engaging students and faculty in the design of learning environments? 5. Assessment techniques: What value do images or visualization mappings selected by users have in assessing the importance of space elements for learning? How valid an indicator is quantity of use to the effectiveness of learning spaces? What insights can be gained for design of physical spaces from virtual learning activities (e.g., gaming, Second Life)? [53] Research activities observing the brain; ethnographic methods studying the workplace, knowledge organizations, and children behavior; and student portfolio reviews are among the diverse directions where an assessment of learning may stimulate topics related to libraries and learning. Added Implications The explorations that result in this essay involved a journey to unexpected topics. The topic of how the assessment of space relates to libraries’ ability and practice to perform their function seemed, on the surface (and when invited to prepare this essay), fairly straightforward. As long as traditions of defining what librarians do (as a manifestation of library function) are linked to a building, this topical question follows a long tradition of counting what a library has and what physical dimensions are needed to house it, as well as the more recent practice of identifying customer perceptions of the quality of delivering what libraries do. But when addressing the topic as a problem of applied research, the purpose of an assessment calls for articulation of what the library function is. Therein lies the winding path for addressing the topic, as the function of the academic library is evolving. Space has importance in discussing the newer role of the library (embodied by its librarians and other staff intentions and activities) as a collaborative partner or a facilitator in learning and in the creation of new knowledge. The possibilities and activities of discovery and utilization of information have broken beyond the boundaries of physical spaces. Similarly, the nature of the assessment of space to enable and foster these activities stretches beyond the limited nature of library assessments. The profession adapted research and theory developed in other fields, such as marketing and business, for the assessment of libraries as service organizations. It now is expanding its adaptability to work with research in such diverse fields as learning sciences, architecture and interior design, environmental studies, pedagogy, instructional design, and anthropology. Exploring the relationship of space, and its design and use, to the functions of the academic library is a rich topic but one only beginning to be addressed in the library literature and culture. This essay feels incomplete, in part because of the uncertainty if it captures the state of research and practice on the topic across the various disciplines that contribute to it. It challenges the exploration to continue with discipline and thoroughness appropriate to applied research. The focused discussion of the topic of library space at a library assessment conference promises to generate new insights to augment this introductory essay. The newest paradigm of the library and its roles to engage in teaching and learning, while continuing its support of research, calls for transformation of the librarian’s identity. As long as the profession limits its identity to what a building can do, it will remain as a service provider. The service is important, even likely to be universally valued in academia. But as service providers, librarians are relegated to serve and thus ultimately are conceived as servants within the academy. They support the “real” work of the academic enterprise, whether that is teaching, research, or other service to society. A conception of the librarian as a partner, a collaborative facilitator of learning to happen in a college or university, divorces the profession from its traditional roots with a building. Teachers are not “classroomarians,” scientists are not “laboratorians,” information technologists are not “computerians,” and even basketball coaches are not “courtarians.” Like these other academic professionals, librarians bring information, expertise, theoretical constructs, and practice to the advancement of learning and research. The space in which librarians have worked may have shaped their contributions to the academy—to accumulate information sources and provide services to utilize them. The assessment of library spaces for such roles has developed in fairly linear fashion. But a liberation of librarians from the buildings that house accumulated information resources and their customers may powerfully contribute to the transformation of embedding the profession into campus life. The assessment of library space may remain most relevant in terms of the library’s role to house and to serve. Assessment of library spaces, likely moving more into the metaphoric virtual “spaces,” may become more an assessment of the needs, behavior, and accomplishments of its inhabitants to learn and to create new knowledge with information. The library’s added value will be evaluated not only in terms of its successful judgments and strategies to accumulate information encased in publications and Web links but in the services provided to access and effectively utilize them. The library’s value will also need to be assessed in terms of the spaces and relationships surrounding the learning it fosters, in part through interactions with librarians and other partners. Library space assessment is explored in association with the Japanese concept of “ba,” thought of as a shared space to build relationships and to advance both individual and collective knowledge [54–55]. The concept of space in this perspective may be physical (e.g., offices), virtual (e.g., e-mails), or mental (e.g., shared experiences) [33]. Methodologies for assessment of library spaces are becoming expansive and exciting and have the potential to advance the conversations beyond the building to the very essence of the library.