Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents: Implications for Practice and US Education Mary K. Chelton A study of service encounters between adult library staff and adolescent users drawing on the communication theories of Erving Goffman, Michael Lipsky, and Hartmut Mokros is reported from three data sources: a content analysis of profes- sional guides to conduct, group interviews with adult library staff and adoles- cents, and taped observations of professional and clerical encounters in a high school library. Professional guides to practice are predominantly prescriptive, ad- vocating the avoidance of behaviors admittedly prevalent in practice. Adults and adolescents are congruent on what they want out of ideal encounters, but admit to stereotypical views of the other based on age and appearance. Service is found to be multidimensional, primarily clustered in very short interactions when classes change, more predominantly concerned with help with equipment, and less than half of what staff do in the high school library. An equal amount of time is allocated to enforcement activities, none of which is alluded to in professional guides to conduct. Influences of technology on practice and rhetoric on reality are discussed. Service encounters have become a ma- jor concern of contemporary organiza- tions. Nearly 80 percent of new jobs cre- ated in the 1980s were in services, and 70 percent of private-sector employees now work in service businesses.1 Osborne devotes much of Reinventing Government to ways in which govern- ment can improve services to citizens,2 and there has been persistent interest in Total Quality Management (TQM) for improving service quality in the public sector, including libraries, for the last decade.3 Recent library and information science (LIS) research includes a study measuring the service quality of aca- demic library services.4 Addressing service solely in manage- rial, instrumental terms, however, under- states the importance of this activity, es- pecially when it is becoming one "which occupies a significant portion of any given individual's time in modern soci- ety."5 As a basic form of social interaction Spring 1999 99
100 Journal of Education for Library and information Science About the Author Mary K. Chelton is Associate Professor, Graduate School of Library and Information Studies, Queens College, Flushing, New York. This article is based on the research for the author's dissertation, which was a cowinner of the 1997 ALISE Doctoral Student Dissertation Competition. in everyday life, service encounters sig- nify human relationships where a sense of the larger community is fostered through a familiar, shared ritual.6 Harris suggests that the service ethic of the profession is being eroded as li- brarianship becomes more aligned with the "information professions," with an increased emphasis on information tech- nology.7 Gutek speculates that the cur- rent transition toward anonymous or "pseudorelational," technologically en- hanced (or substituted) service encoun- ters in all fields may possibly "help ac- count for contemporary society's lack of kindness, random acts of violence, and pervasive alienation and disaffection."8 Such observations should be of particu- lar concern to LIS educators preparing practitioners to serve youth, since they appear to be identical to current social indicators for that population. Goffman calls the "service transac- tion" the paradigmatic exemplar avail- able for analyzing the "interaction or- der," or face-to-face interactive domain. This is where social life - who we are in relation to each other - is constructed. Service encounters draw upon a wider and often taken-for-granted cultural con- text involving "government protocol, traffic rules, and other formalizations of precedence" that create expectations of "equal treatment." This is apparent in the variety of interactive resources em- ployed to cope with different social sta- tuses, to manage queues fairly, and to display a courteous demeanor. Under- lying these rules are a variety of unstated assumptions about who can qualify as a serious candidate for service. Goffman suggests that "four critical diffuse sta- tuses" in our society - age, gender, class, and race - provide a cross-cutting grid on which individuals can be placed and offer identification markers in social situations where no other identification is available.9 The study reported here looked at how "age" enters into the qual- ifying rules of the service situation, espe- cially how one is recognized as "quali- fied" or "disqualified" for service through seemingly mundane communi- cation practices. The age categories ex- amined were adolescent library users be- tween twelve and eighteen, and adult library service staff.10 Analytic Framework This study drew primarily on the analyti- cal perspectives of Erving Goffman; Mi- chael Lipsky; and Hartmut Mokros, Lynn Mullins, and Tefco Saracevic. These theo- rists view the social situation as a ritual that is choreographed by unseen, largely unconscious and taken-for-granted "rules," through which people fit their de- veloping lines of conduct to one another. Goffman 's work emphasizes the nature of face-to-face interaction: how one presents oneself socially; how one frames, rede- fines, and transforms social situations; and how discrediting social attributes at- tached to one are socially managed. Lipsky is interested in how frontline ser- vice workers in public sector organiza- tions use their discretionary power in in- stitutional "client control routines." Mokros, Mullins, and Saracevic examine ways in which communicative activity Volume 40, Number 2
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 101 constructs identity as a product or by- product of social interaction. While each theorist is from a different discipline, they share an approach to discourse described by Schiffrin as one that focuses on "situ- ated meaning." Communication is a way of explaining how understandings of so- cial life are produced and reproduced within specific contexts.11 Methods and Procedures Service encounters between adults and adolescents were examined in the study from three different vantage points: 1) content analysis of professional guides to practice as the discursive "umbrella" within which librarians anchor their conceptualizations of ideal practice; 2) group interviews with adults and ado- lescents with questions intended to elicit expectations of ideal encounters as well as understandings of how differ- ent age categories represented by service recipients or providers are perceived; and 3) recorded observation of actual en- counters in a library setting to see how professional discourse, local context, and perceptions based on past experi- ence are enacted face-to-face. Both pro- fessional and nonprofessional staff were interviewed, audio or videotaped, tran- scribed, and coded for content. Sampling Frame Public and school libraries were in- cluded among the sampled sites which were chosen based on the following cri- teria: 1) ease of access to the participants through established library networks; 2) documented professional regard for the site or its managing librarian (i.e., cited in published recognition of service excellence;) 3) wide geographical varia- tion; 4) theoretical relevance (i.e., library sites most likely to provide instances of adult-adolescent service encounters, or those sites most likely to provide adult staff and adolescent users with recalled perceptions of service encounters); and 5) everyday contexts which include ob- servable, naturally occurring behavior. Data-Gathering Procedures Data for this study included responses to a query on the Internet discussion list PUBYAC regarding why adoles- cents are problematic; a sample of rec- ommended standards for practice pro- mulgated by the American Library Association from 1985 to 1995 (listed in Appendix); data from two group in- terviews of adolescent library users in the West and Midwest, and one group interview of adult public library public service staff in the Southeast; and two sets of recorded interactional data in a particular library in the Pacific North- west. Approximately six hours of audio and video observations were recorded during the first three class periods of a staff-designated "typical" day at the lat- ter site in March, 1995. Data collected at multiple and differ- ent types of library sites were intended to increase understanding of various con- texts within which library service en- counters take place and to explore con- vergence among the data sets. The sites included both school and public libraries and clerical as well as professional ser- vice locations within them, specifically those places adolescents were most likely to interact with staff. Since anecdotal evi- dence suggests that adult-adolescent ser- vice encounters are generally problem- atic for staff, at least in public libraries, the researcher felt that a selection of only "best practice" exemplars might better isolate problematic service characteris- tics than a sample that included "bad or mediocre practice" sites. The four data sets not only provided multiple vantage points for examining service encounters between adults and adolescents in libraries, but also offered Spring 1999
102 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science simultaneous but different levels of anal- ysis of the service encounter phenome- non from a communication perspective. The professional guides provided the overall public discourse within which practice is taught and conceptualized, or in Foucault's terms, an "archaeology" of recommended idealized practice within which "actual" practice takes place.12 The interactive data set provided the analytical level of "lived" experience, or the "display setting" for professional discourse.13 Observing face-to-face in- teraction provided a window on the hid- den, or "virtual discourse" of practice. This is the level of analysis where the in- stitutional constraints noted by Lipsky collide with idealized rhetoric, so that any working accommodation between the two might best be observed.14 A third data set addressed perceptions of service held by adults and adolescents, provid- ing insights into how individuals have reflected upon and given meaning to past service experiences. These data of- fer access to yet another level of influ- ence on interaction - self-reflection. The PUBYAC e-mail responses provided other examples of the continued discon- nection between promulgated and en- acted theories of practice, as well as adult provider attitudes toward adoles- cents. Their purpose is primarily illus- trative, although they add corroboration to the perceptual data from the focus group interviews. Analytic Approach The specific method used was microanalysis of naturally occurring, everyday library service encounters for comparison with both user and provider perceptions of recalled service encoun- ters, and professionally recommended standards of practice for such encoun- ters. The emphasis was on "how lan- guage is situated in particular circum- stances of social life, and on how it adds (or reflects) different types of meaning (expressive, instrumental) and struc- ture (e.g., interactional, institutional) to those circumstances."15 The primary microanalytic method employed in this study was ethno- graphic, that is, the creation of a detailed description of observed behavior from which the meaning of the behavior for the participants could be interpreted. This process observed what the participants seemed to be accomplishing by their communicative actions, in particular, the ways in which the interactive situation was being defined. Detailed codings of the content categories in the transcripts of each interaction were aggregated under work activity types to describe exactly how time was spent by library staff. Findings and Discussion What Service Should Be (Professional Discourse) Seven widely distributed LIS policy statements on professional conduct and related texts adopted and published by ALA between 1985 and 1995 were ana- lyzed for what they said practice should be (see Appendix). In essence, these doc- uments say that service may be summa- rized primarily as all the ways one pro- vides links between users and resources. Learning, understanding, interpretation of the resources, etc., are individual as- sets generally expected to be present in or acquired by the user after being pro- vided the link with the right material or service. These guides to professional conduct also say that library staff are ex- pected to initiate contact with and relate consistently and equitably to individual and diverse users with courtesy, energy, enthusiasm, understanding, respect, and tolerance. Users are persons who bring to staff wants and needs which are then to be filled to the satisfaction of the user. Five out of the seven statements are Volume 40, Number 2
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 103 overtly prescriptive and indicate explic- itly that librarians should do certain things, thus admitting that actual (as op- posed to ideal) service behavior warrants such a directive. In fact, the more pre- scriptive the document, the more recog- nition there seems to be, not only of ex- isting barriers to ideal service, such as "hostility and distrust" mentioned in Di- rections for Library Service to Young Adults, but also of the need to remove them to improve service.16 These texts also emphasize, if not youth specifically, diversity among users. For example, the Reference and User Services Association document contains the following: Information service staff members must communicate easily and effectively with the full range of the library's clien- tele, regardless of a client's age, gender, ethnicity, disability, sexual preference, or English-language proficiency.17 Lipsky indicates that the working "street-level bureaucrat" (i.e., SLB or public service staff) who is unable to meet idealized prescriptions instead de- velops a job conception that reduces the strain between abilities and goals, thus making the job easier to manage psycho- logically. Although they are ideally ex- pected to exercise discretion in response to individual differences in their work, in practice SLBs process people in terms of "routines, stereotypes, and other mechanisms that facilitate work tasks."18 Such everyday client-control routines are the service barriers being prescribed against in these standards for practice. It is possibly not accidental that so many of them specify avoidance of less than ideal behaviors based on "age. " How Service Is Perceived and Recalled (Self-Reflection) Common themes that emerged during the interviews included: 1) courtesy and knowledge are expected attributes of TABLE 1 Service Encounter Perceptions: Comparison of Themes by Group service providers; 2) maturity and per- sonal appearance are factors that influence service interactions; and 3) stereotyping based on age and appear- ance is common. As seen in table 1, a comparison of perceptions among the three groups reveals a high degree of redundancy among their perceptions. Differences among the groups ap- peared in two ways. Adolescents ex- pressed more unanimous frustration over being ignored, marginalized, re- stricted, treated with discourtesy, re- garded as stupid, or tricked outright than did the adults. Both point out that being adolescent brings on Stereotypie expectations by adults of being stupid or of being trouble, except possibly where service staff are young themselves or "think young." From the perspective of the adolescents specifically, being a teenager is to be stereotyped and catego- Spring 1999 Perceptions Ideal Barriers to Group Encounter Ideal High Courtesy Appearance School Knowledge Age Surveillance Stereotyping Middle Helpfulness Appearance School Respect Age Surveillance Stereotyping Adult Courtesy Appearance Knowledge Age Helpfulness Surveillance Respect StereotvDina
104 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science TABLE 2 All Encounters: Activity Types by Individual Encounter Content and Length rized as part of a group that is underesti- mated, suspect, watched, restricted, or ignored. Personal appearance is "read" negatively by adults through adoles- cents' clothing or style, and seems to trigger Stereotypie expectations. The problem with adult concerns about appearance is that, for the adolescents themselves, their personal appearance is a marker of their particular social world which they are unwilling to disre- gard to diminish adult disapproval. The adult staff had a restricted con- cept of acceptable practice for serving adolescents in libraries. They viewed using the library as an informal meeting place as inappropriate, and considered themselves lucky to have a separate room for this activity. When asked what they might do to improve services for ad- olescents, they seemed to be at a loss for suggestions, in part because of the pres- ence of a large, active youth services de- partment. There seemed to be confusion Volume 40, Number 2 Number of Encounter Average Encounter Encounter Range Content Categories1 Length in Seconds in Seconds Activity Types librarian circ. desk librarian circ. desk librarian circ. desk Service2 Circ. desk activities3 9 40 46 92 3-94 1-298 Help with supplies 10 8 26 7 3-79 2-14 Help with directions - 8 - 14 - 9-18 Help with information 4 6 155 43 14-231 11-96 Offers of help 7 4 7 12 3-15 5-27 Help with equipment 20 2 71 20 6-322 4-49 Help teachers 6 1 77 7 7-144 7-7 Follow-ups 2 - 6 6-7 Entire Category 58 69 54 34 3-322 1-298 Enforcement4 Passes 46 36 14 12 1-80 1-68 Traffic 7 5 32 52 4-72 28-75 Enforce rules 4 3 9 15 5-16 15-15 Entire Category 57 44 15 15 1-80 1-75 Socializing5 Chat with people 21 17 63 19 2-254 5-39 School events 9 - 67 - 5-175 Greetings, etc. 7 - 3 - 1-4- Entire Category 37 17 50 19 1-254 5-39
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 105 TABLE 2 continued 1 . Total number of content categories was 1 83 for librarian, 1 44 for circulation desk. 2. Service made up 32% of total activity for librarian, 49% for circulation desk. 3. Checking books in and out; registering student e-mail accounts. 4. Enforcement made up 31% of total activity for librarian, 30% for circulation desk. 5. Socializing made up 20% of total activity for librarian, 1 2% for circulation desk. 6. Work made up 14% of total activity for librarian, 3% for circulation desk. The category was called "Management" for the librarian encounters. 7. Uncoded activities made up 3% of total activity for librarian, 7% for circulation desk. - Activity did not occur. over the question's implied responsibil- ity for a clientele organizationally dele- gated elsewhere, as in this reply: And we don't really, the way we're de- partmentalized here, I mean, we could maybe do some reference stuff. I can't think of what we would do, but we don't really have anything to do with programming or young adult workshops or young adult volunteer programs.19 Lipsky describes one process that street-level bureaucracies use to cope with difficult, "different," or trouble- some clients, namely, the creation of a special unit for them. Such units "often end up taking responsibility for areas that are properly the general responsi- bility of other bureaucrats. They pro- vide a symbolic approach to deeply di- visive issues, and by providing street-level bureaucrats with a safety valve in their confrontation with cli- ents; they may do as much harm as good with respect to changing the general ori- entation of agency personnel."20 What Service Actually Is (Interaction) Table 2 shows that while service is a large part (32 percent) of what the librar- ian was observed doing, and an even larger part of what the library clerk was Spring 1999 Number of Encounter Average Encounter Encounter Range Content Categories1 Length in Seconds in Seconds Activity Types librarian circ. desk librarian circ. desk librarian circ. desk Work6 Fixing equipment - 1 Teaching (one-on-one) - 1 Scheduling 3 1 22 - 11-30 Shelving - 1 Locate people 3 - 25 5-58 Supervising 19 - 35 - 2-113 Entire category 25 4 32 85 2-113 25-217 Uncoded7 6 10 31 7 3-87 1-21 Entire cateaorv 6 10 31 7 3-87 1-21
106 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science TABLE 3 All Encounters: Duration in Seconds doing (49 percent), service was not the only nor the predominant activity en- gaged in, nor was service exclusively con- fined to information activities. The pres- ence of technology, combined with the absence of a technical support position for it, meant that "service" was mostly help with equipment. Encounters are pri- marily a series of short, clustered interro- gations when classes change (see tables 3 and 4). Staff sort students entering the library by asking: "What do you need?" "Do you have a pass?" "Who are you with?" Although the interview structure is similar when encounters involve enforce- ment in that they usually begin with a question, the content of the exchange is di- rected toward traffic control, compliance with the district-mandated pass system, and conformance with behavioral rules. "Information needs" in these data are primarily user-identified queries to staff, most of which are not technically about "information" as the term is usu- ally discussed. How "information needs" not self-identified are perceived by library staff is less clear. From this observation, "service needs" or "needs for assistance" more accurately describe these encounters. The staff assistance given is congruent with the intermedi- ary role mentioned in Information Power.21 Given the multi dimensionality of service provided, however, the entire meaning of "information needs" as usu- ally discussed by library educators and practitioners is called into question. TABLE 4 Descriptive Statistics for the Duration of Time* between Librarian Encounters *ln seconds. **This number reflects all interactions, including those embedded within others. Another aspect of service was the presence and use of service desks. Both the librarian and the library clerk tend to work "from" their desks, rather than "at" them. They walk to the stacks with stu- dents and teachers, leave to reshelve ma- terials, run into the staff workroom, to the school office, etc. In the meantime, students come up to the desk, because for these users a desk signals service, al- though it is frequently delayed. As Thomas points out, library furnishings and architecture have semiotic proper- ties.22 Since being ignored at service desks was a major irritant for the adoles- cents interviewed, the lack of attention to unexplained waiting time while staff are away from service desks is problem- atic. As Maister points out, when actual waiting is unexplained, annoyance over having to wait increases, which creates negative perceptions of service.23 The one thing both groups of ado- lescents recounted was their frustration over the ways in which they were not re- spected. In this regard, there are definite indications that relational work in the school library could be improved. Incor- porating more personal greetings within interactions, especially when different types of encounters are so closely juxta- posed, would be one way. Opening a ser- vice encounter with a greeting like, "Hello, how can I help?" is more re- spectful of the user and takes no more time than "Do you need help?" or "What do you need?," both of which have a very instrumental, cut-to-the-chase feel Volume 40, Number 2 Librarian Circ. Desk Median 17 14 Mean 37 26 SD 54 39 Range 1-322 1-298 N 153 123 Median Mean SD Range N" 7 33 72 0-450 171
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 107 about them. The same is true with en- forcement queries. Implications for Practice and Preservice Education Concepts of Service While there is nothing inherently wrong with promulgating idealized standards for practice, they do not help practitio- ners whose everyday life can never meet the standard. None of the texts examined alludes to the pass system in schools, which has become so ubiquitous and nor- malized that several school librarians were amazed at the researcher's surprise over the amount of time the school library staff spent enforcing it. In discussions with the librarian at the research site, she made it clear that she had to live with the pass system as district policy and tried to make it as unonerous as possible for all concerned, which the observational data fully corroborate. The lack of attention to the daily reality of school libraries in this regard negates the effect of the rhetoric of the guidelines and may be a reason why they are frequently ignored in practice. In Information Power, for example, had some attention been given to the possible distractions and labor costs of, as well as the time allocated to, managing an en- forcement system, school library media specialists might have found other rec- ommended changes in their professional roles more palatable.24 The entire issue of what "equal treat- ment" means in practice needs more at- tention than now provided in published guidelines, especially since most of those texts promulgate barrier-free service. At the same time, they admit that discrimina- tion based on age is a prevalent barrier, but do not describe in detail how these two things might be reconciled. The self- congratulatory nature of most professional library practice publishing encourages li- brarians to believe and repeat their own idealized rhetoric, while client-control routines in libraries go virtually unexam- ined, and discussion of them either does- n't take place or goes underground. Libraries with homogeneous and heterogeneous clientele ages may have different magnitudes of the same prob- lem with age category stigmatization, or they may have different problems. The relationship between problems of prac- tice and type of audience has not been examined within this framework. Ideal- ized generic rhetoric, or theory, that pre- tends that all types of libraries are alike, regardless of their service audiences, is not particularly helpful to practitioners like those studied here who are trying to provide ideal service in a far from ideal everyday world. There needs to be more attention to distinctions among library contexts rather than a continued and possibly faulty assumption that they are all alike in that they are a type of "infor- mation system." It is long past time that standards of practice and research studies took spe- cific notice of the clerical presence in most libraries, instead of subsuming or ig- noring it under discussions about poli- cies. If Lipsky is correct in his assessment of how street-level bureaucracies work, a great many idealized policies promul- gated in published standards of practice get distorted into something else in dis- cretionary clerical processes. For many adolescents, the adult clerk whom they first meet at the circulation desk is the in- stitutional representative of the library and its policies. The methodology used to gather naturally occurring data would help researchers and their practitioner audience to better understand what hap- pens at clerical service desks in libraries. Multidimensionality of Service Concept Based on the activity types amalgamated from the content coding of work activities Spring 1999
108 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of the librarian and library clerk, this study shows that "library service" is a multidimensional concept, encompass- ing many activities, of which providing information may only be a small part. While the current positioning of library work as part of the "information profes- sions" may be politically useful in some areas, in actual practice open to the pub- lic view of users, information work is not all that librarians do. In fact, the data here suggest that some librarians do not pro- vide information at all, but define their role as assisting people to find informa- tion on their own. Given this frame, the li- brarian bias toward user competence re- ported by Radford is understandable, but it is also not necessarily what profes- sional rhetoric says that library practice is.25 There should be further studies ob- serving and comparing what those who call themselves "information profession- als" actually do in practice. Division of Labor in Practice The question that arises from a compari- son of the librarian's activities and the circulation desk activities is why the professional and clerical division of labor categories is so blurred in this li- brary, and whether this is normal. One explanation here is responsiveness to waiting users by whichever staff mem- ber is free and near the circulation desk, especially since one staff member was sick the observed day. Another explana- tion is obviously the absorption of a technical support role by the librarian. Regardless of explanations in this particular context, these data suggest that the librarian's work rests atop a pyr- amid of other kinds of work which will be absorbed by the librarian if other workers are not available to do them. Enforcement of the pass system, for ex- ample, would have been delegated to a clerical staff member rather than to the librarian, had the person not been sick. The real everyday problem, though, is that staff can be sick frequently, and if there are not enough of them propping up the librarian role, it devolves into clerical or technical support work im- mediately. How often this happens should possibly be a matter of concern; otherwise, the labor categories, "profes- sional" and "clerical," are observably meaningless to others. This may be why so many users think anyone who works in a library is the librarian. Case studies of how this hierarchical arrangement works and where it has successfully been modified would give practitioners and their governing bodies a better idea of how work is, or may be, legitimately organized in libraries. While it is obvious from table 2 that the average length of service encounters is generally longer than enforcement en- counters, the sheer number of the latter raises the question of the labor cost to the library and the school district of doing this, especially when the activity "devolves" to higher paid staff when lower paid are absent. Even with a full complement of staff, though, it would be worth knowing how much of the labor cost is devoted to enforcement activity, something totally unacknowledged in any published standards of practice. Influence of Technology The distribution of activities under "Service" suggests that the influence of increased technology has changed the service role of the librarian to a sort of technical assistant to users, helping them to help themselves find informa- tion on machines by showing them how to make the machines work. This is not information retrieval or teaching and in- struction, but rather a de-skilling of real information work and possibly the inevi- table result of a self-service, compe- tent-user framework embedded in the definition of library service, particularly, Volume 40, Number 2
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 109 but not exclusively, in school libraries. Regardless of what is causing this, how- ever, this service activity as observed is not the "information literacy" work described in professional standards of practice, and suggests that para- professional technical support for us- ers is emerging in the library work- place, but is being subsumed by profes- sional librarians. Audits of work activities using the methodology and typology of the interaction part of this study may help working librarians not only to document the changes in the kinds of activities comprising their work, but also the data needed to justify different positions. Summary Library practitioners would do well to note that users remember more how they are treated in a service encounter than what they get from it. Regardless of the instrumental purpose of library ser- vice encounters, they are also occasions of social engagement, or what Goffman would call "status rituals" of conduct which have symbolic implications for those involved.26 These little everyday ceremonies not only include acts of ser- vice, but also acts of deference in which the worth of the other person is con- veyed. Since libraries share similar structural constraints with other public sector bureaucracies, as well as con- straints unique to library settings which affect the timing and nature of service encounters, practitioners might look for transformative opportunities within them. By acknowledging the existence of the constraints, discussion can follow in classrooms and professional meet- ings about creative coping mechanisms, including in some instances, the possi- bility of dismissing them. Comments from the interview data show that adolescents already feel de- meaned in many of their service en- counters with adults, and many adults assume that adolescents are already or are going to be problematic. There is of- ten little trust between them and adult service providers because of past nega- tive experiences and stereotypical attri- butions. Being part of a stigmatized group adults find suspect is a normal- ized social experience outside the fam- ily for adolescents. The separateness of belonging to an age category others want to avoid is reinforced in schools by age-segregation, and in public libraries either by delegating organizational re- sponsibility to a "special unit," by ar- chitectural exclusion, or by a standard of "equal treatment" which ignores ado- lescent individuality. Goffman calls this having a "governmentally ratified personal identity" and discusses those who deviate from the stigma attached to them by resistance in which they "act ir- regularly and somewhat rebelliously in connection with our basic institutions." He calls them the "disaffiliates," a possi- bly accurate description of adolescents and the "problems" libraries have with them.27 Giddens suggests that a stable sense of self-identity is bound up in being able to trust others as part of building a co- herent personal biography. "Trust, in- terpersonal relations, and a conviction of the 'reality' of things go hand in hand in the social settings of adult life."28 Each of the everyday experiences of ubiquitous service encounters is part of this process of learning who we are and how we are to live together. Helping an adolescent to use the photocopy ma- chine, or checking out a book, or asking to see a pass may seem mundane and te- dious to someone who does it con- stantly. The young person receiving the service, however, is neither mundane nor tedious, but rather another person who wants an emotional connection and respect. Providing library service Spring 1999
1 10 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science without it is otherwise a very empty and possibly meaningless activity. No matter how service is idealized within professional standards, real ser- vice occurs in everyday settings where practical theories of how work is done and who it is done for are enacted in ev- ery encounter. Unless those practical theories are addressed in more studies that actually look at what happens in ev- eryday contexts and how people on both sides of the encounter feel about it, writ- ing standards for practice becomes an exercise in futility at the association level for bridging a chasm that is possi- bly already too wide where adolescents are concerned. References 1. Robert Reich, The Work of Nations: Pre- paring Ourselves for 21st Century Capi- talism (New York: Knopf, 1993): 84-86. 2. David E. Osborn, Reinventing Govern- ment: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit is Transforming the Public Sector (Reading, Mass.: Addison- Wesley, 1992). 3. William E. Deming, Out of the Crisis (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1982). 4.Danuta A. Nitecki, "Changing the Con- cept and Measure of Service Quality in Academic Libraries," Journal of Aca- demic Librarianship 22 (1996): 181-90. 5. John A. Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, Carol F. Surprenant, and Evelyn G. Gutman, "Service Encounters: An Over- view," in Service Encounter: Managing Employee/Customer Interaction in Ser- vice Businesses, ed. John A. Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, Carol F. Surprenant (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1985): 1. 6.Erving Goffman, Interaction Ritual: Es- says on Face-to-Face Behavior (New York: Pantheon, 1967). 7. Roma Harris, Librarianship: The Erosion of a Woman's Profession (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1992). 8. Barbara A. Gutek, Dynamics of Service: Reflections on the Changing Nature of Customer/Provider Interactions (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), 286. 9.Erving Goffman, "Interaction Order," American Sociological Review 48: 14. 10. Mary K. Chelton, Adult-Adolescent Ser- vice Encounters: The Library Context (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers University, 1997). ll.Erving Goffman, Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (New York: Doubleday, 1959); Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1963); Interaction Ritual: Es- says on Face-to-Face Behavior (New York: Pantheon, 1967); Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experi- ence (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1974); Michael Lipsky, "Toward a Theory of Street-Level Bureaucracy," in Theoretical Perspectives on Urban Poli- tics (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:Prentice- Hall, 1976); Street-Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Ser- vices (New York: Russell Sage Founda- tion, 1980); Hartmut B. Mokros, Lynn S. Mullins, and Tefco Saracevic, "Practice and Personhood in Professional Interac- tion: Social Identities and Information Needs," Library and Information Science Research 17 (1995): 237-57; "From Infor- mation and Behavior to Interaction and Identity," in Information and Behavior, Vol. 5 .Interaction & Id en tity (New Bruns- wick, N.J.: Transaction, 1996): 1-24; Deborah Schiffrin, Approaches to Dis- course (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1994): 134. 12. Michel Foucault, Archaeology of Knowl- edge &The Discourse on Language, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pan- theon, 1972). 13. Anthony Giddens, Central Problems in Social Theory (Berkeley, Calif.: Univer- sity of California Press, 1979): 191. 14. Michael Lipsky, Street-Level Bureau- cracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1980). 15. Deborah Schiffrin, Approaches to Dis- course (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1994): 7. 16. Young Adult Library Services Associa- tion, Directions for Library Service to Volume 40, Number 2
Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents 1 1 1 Young Adults, 2d ed. (Chicago: Ameri- can Library Association, 1993). 17. Standards and Guidelines Committee. Reference and Adult Services Division. American Library Association. "Informa- tion Services for Information Consumers: Guidelines for Providers," RQ 30 (1990): 264. 18.Lipsky, Street-Level Bureaucracy, 140. 19.Chelton, Adult-Adolescent Service En- counters: The Library Context, 117. 2O.Lipsky, Street Level Bureaucracy, 136. 21. Information Power: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (Chi- cago: American Library Association and Washington, D.C.: Association for Educa- tion Communications and Technology, 1988). 22. Nancy P. Thomas, Reading Libraries: An Interpretive Study of Discursive Prac- tices in Library Architecture and the Interactional Construction of Personal Identity (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers University, 1996). 23. David H. Maister, "Psychology of Waiting Lines," in Service Encounter: Managing Employee/Customer Interaction in Ser- vice Businesses, ed. John A. Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, Carol F. Surprenant (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1985): 113-23. 24. Unfortunately, this problem has not been corrected in the 1998 edition. 25. Marie L. Radford, Relational Aspects of Reference Interactions: A Qualitative In- vestigation of the Perceptions of Users and Librarians in the Academic Library (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers University, 1993). 26.Goitman, Interaction Ritual, 56-57. 27.Goffman, Stigma, 143. 28. Anthony Giddens, Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1991): 51-52. Appendix Guides to Professional Conduct Examined 1. ALA Code of Professional Ethics (Chicago: American Library Association, 1995). 2. Standards and Guidelines Committee. Reference and Adult Services Division. American Li- brary Association, "Information Services for Information Consumers: Guidelines for Pro- viders," RQ, 30, (1990) 262-64. 3. Information Power: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (Chicago: American Li- brary Association and Washington, D.C.: Association for Education Communications and Technology, 1988). 4. "Library Bill of Rights and Interpretations," in ALA Policy Manual (Chicago: American Li- brary Association, 1996). 5. Prince George's County Memorial Library System, Service-Code for Information Services - A Manual of Policies, Standards, Guidelines, and Instructions, 2d ed. (Hyattsville, Md.: PGCML, 1991). (Distributed by ALA's Public Library Association.) 6. Young Adult Library Services Association, Directions for Library Service to Young Adults, 2d ed. (Chicago: American Library Association, 1993). 7. Young Adult Library Services Association. Vision (Chicago: American Library Association, 1994). Spring 1999