THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE DURING THE LAST DECADE: FUNDAMENTAL CHANGES AND CONSTRUCTIVE ACHIEVEMENT JOS1 MEYER T NHE wealth and variety of collections in French librar- ies have always attracted foreign visitors, but the dif- ficulties encountered when working in institutions far behind the times in material equipment and research facilities have often discouraged their patient efforts. Americans in par- ticular have been frequent visitors to the National Library of France, and they know well the obstacles with which their search for information has been beset. They remember the complicated catalogs which could not be used without the help of a guide and their astonishment at the lack of intellectual and material con- veniences that are an integral part of their own libraries, or- ganized solely with a view to facilitating the task of the research worker. The purpose of these notes is to report on the efforts made over a period of ten years to modernize a great institution with several centuries of traditions, and thus enable it to hold its rank among the world's great centers of learning. SITUATION OF THE BIBLIOTHhQUE NATIONALE IN 1930 The general situation of the BibliothAque Nationale in 1930 was such as to cause grave concern for its future in spite of all the efforts of its active and enterprising administrator, M. Roland-Marcel. There had been some improvements, of course. In I925 a law had been passed tightening the provisions of the legal deposit act. This resulted in increased effectiveness and a more universal compliance with its clauses. ln I929 an agree- ment had been reached with certain large American libraries, making it possible to speed up the preparation and publication of the Catalogue g6n6ral. A grant from the Rockefeller Foundation in 1930 had pro- 805
8o6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY vided the funds for the purchase of indispensable foreign mate- rial, long badly needed, and for the binding of arrears accumu- lated during years of insufficient appropriation. Finally, public interest had been aroused by a series of expositions in the li- brary, all of which had proved very successful. All these measures, however, remained isolated attempts to remedy a situation which called for a major operation tackling the problem in its entirety. The library was crowded to the point of suffocation. There had been three million books in I900, but since then their number had increased by another million. The central stack for printed matter held barely one- half of this collection, the remainder being scattered through various attics, unprotected against dangerous variations in tem- perature and humidity. The manuscripts were no better off. The chiefs of the several departments were in a permanent state of alarm over the danger menacing irreplaceable collections thus packed together. The internal services, such as the legal deposit, the accessions, and the catalog, inventory, and binding sections, had been com- pelled to give up to the all-pervading flood of books year after year ever increasing portions of the space allotted to them. As a result, working conditions in these services were deplorable. The meagerness of appropriations (a consequence of the French financial crisis) was such that, in spite of considerable efforts made during these last years, the binding-to quote only one example-is still several hundred thousand volumes in ar- rears. These volumes had to be shelved in their paper covers. Between I920 and I928 the published volumes of the Cata- logue ge'ne'ral had fallen to four, then to three, and finally to an all-time low of two volumes per year. Other catalogs begun ear- lier remained unfinished. In the Bibliographie de la France the annual subject index was dispensed with for reasons of economy. The catalogs of manuscripts, medals, and prints suffered great delay. However, a few fine pieces of specialized work kept alive the scholarly reputation of the institution, thus demonstrating what could have been accomplished had the necessary means been provided.
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 807 Needfor a general reform.-In the course of its long history the Bibliotheque Nationale has experienced several periods of finan- cial stringency alternating with brief spells of prosperity. The first half of the nineteenth century can be described as a per- petual crisis, growing worse from decade to decade until a great administrator, Taschereau, assisted by a great architect, La- brouste, undertook a basic transformation. Extending their plan of alterations over a period of twenty years, from I855 to 1875, these two men gave the Bibliotheque Nationale the exterior appearance which it retains today. Then, for a span of fifty-five years, the library lived on the impetus received during those twenty years of extensive rebuilding. Again, in the course of these last ten years, a fresh impulse has been given which has affected every department of the library and which, it is hoped, will leave a lasting influence. The charge of the administrator-general of the Bibliotheque Nationale grew more and more complex as the number of de- partments increased and their scope became ever wider. During the ten years of M. Julien Cain's administration, from May i, 1930, to July 23, I940, a number of new services were estab- lished and the field of action of existing departments was greatly expanded. This period may best be characterized as one of far- reaching material, technical, and intellectual change, the last determining the first as befits a scholarly institution. CHANGES IN THE GENERAL ORGANIZATION The addition of four important new departments to the tradi- tional four divisions of the Bibliotheque Nationale is one of the outstanding events of the last ten years. First, the Bibliotheque Mazarine was brought under the administration of the National Library in I930; the Arsenal Library in I934; the music libraries of the Opera and of the Conservatory of Music in 1935; and, finally, in 1938, the documentation center formerly connected with the Ministry of Commerce and the Ministry of National Economy. At the same time the Department of Printed Books, the most important in the library, added a number of new serv- ices to the traditional forms of library service and extended to
8o8 THE LIBRARY Q_UARTERLY research workers vastly improved facilities, which included newly opened reading rooms equipped with all the instruments of study. The complexities of the task of administering an institution of this type, bound in many ways by its historical background and deep-rooted traditions, while striving to keep abreast of modern needs, can be referred to only in passing. When the Biblio- theque Nationale was granted "civil personality" and financial autonomy under the control of the minister of finance, this step meant a more flexible financial organization for the library, but, at the same time, additional heavy responsibility for the admin- istrator-general, in particular when he was intrusted with the financial management of the fund set aside for structural al- terations. Financially, in 1940, the situation of the Bibliotheque Na- tionale was greatly improved. The regular income from the or- dinary budget was provided by the government appropriation totaling 84S,000 francs (about $3S,000) in I929 and 4,000,000 francs in I940 (about $95,0oo). The exceptional or temporary income was derived from the extraordinary budget. This made special funds available for major building operations as part of a large-scale plan for public works and for the relief of unemploy- ment. A special contribution from the Caisse de la Recherche Scientifique (the National Research Fund) covered the cost of publishing the various catalogs in book form. These extraordi- nary credits made it possible to carry out over a period of years certain carefully established plans for important construction work and architectural alterations of existing buildings, on the one hand, and certain scholarly enterprises, on the other. STRUCTURAL CHANGES AND NEW BUILDINGS The number of problems arising in connection with the planned rejuvenation of the library was so great and the prob- lems were all so interwoven that it became necessary to estab- lish an order of precedence according to their relative urgency. The problem of space, in the opinion of M. Cain, was the root of most of the library's difficulties. If the collections were to be
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NACTIONALE 809 preserved for posterity and the work organized judiciously and profitably, a thorough modernization of existing conveniences and the construction of additional quarters were urgently needed. The execution and partial completion of these two par- allel plans was made possible only through additional funds taken on a large scale from the special government appropria- tion for public works made available in addition to the regular amount from the ordinary budget. These extraordinary funds were granted three times, in 1932, I934, and 1936, for the pur- pose of carrying out a previously established, all-embracing plan approved by the government. Since the quarters of the Department of Medals were the most recent and fairly satisfactory, it was decided to concen- trate all efforts on the other departments-those of Manu- scripts, Prints, and, above all, the Department of Printed Books. Here the problems, arising from the huge quantity of books awaiting the various processes of library routine before being stored for preservation, were of the most serious nature. The lack of space had produced a degree of disorder and confu- sion which threatened to engulf the other services as well. The methods to be used were, of course, primarily determined by existing conditions. Since the library building is bounded by four completely built-up streets in the center of Paris, any kind of expansion in a horizontal direction was out of the question. New space had to be found in depth, and, after sufficient con- solidation of existing foundations, height could be added. In the process of this operation the old cellars were thoroughly trans- formed and made into a series of modern book stacks, to which a number of well-planned offices were added in the basement. Construction work was continued without interruption from 1932 to 1939 and, with only minor delays, even after the out- break of war. Most of the complicated operations were carried out simultaneously; as a result the whole interior of the library was completely transformed in a relatively short time. These major alterations were made while all the library services con- tinued as usual-not the least among the difficulties to be over- come. The final result of this work of adaptation is a series of
8Io THE LIBRACRY QUARTERLY modern rooms within a historic shell. For reasons of architec- tural style the outer walls were left untouched everywhere. General equipment of the building.-No doubt the American public, used to its own up-to-the-minute libraries, will be amazed to learn that the most urgent alterations at the Bib- liotheque Nationale concerned the lighting system, heat, the telephone, freight elevators, and the like. Of all of these there were only rudiments in 1930. It was not until 1924 that electric light was installed in the Department of Printed Books. All other departments of the library remained dependent on day- light, with resulting irregular and often far too brief working hours. An electric-lighting system is now laid in the entire building, including all the stacks. This makes it possible for readers to consult books from any collection during the entire day. A powerful transformer and an emergency generator were installed underground under the central courtyard. As for heating, the various old coal-burning furnaces, always a potential fire threat, were replaced by a modern "thermo cen- ter," which was also placed underground. This is fed by hot air from the central city heating plant (Chauffage central urbain). The installation was completed by a scientific ventilation and air-conditioning system. To reduce the fire hazard as much as possible, various fireproofing processes were applied. They are too technical to be described here, but the fireproof stairs throughout, the metal doors isolating different sections of the building in case of fire, and all-metal elevators and shafts may be mentioned. Finally, extensive sanitary improvements were made for both the staff and the public. The staff was also pro- vided with locker-rooms, showers, and a lunchroom. The new reading rooms of the Department of Printed Books.- The main reading room, totally inadequate for years, could not be enlarged for architectural reasons. Instead, a solution for the problem of overcrowding was sought by providing additional seating space elsewhere, while the reference collection was grad- ually rounded out so as to answer the needs of a larger number of readers and research workers. Four new reading rooms were organized and almost immediately it was found that the service
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NITIONALE 8ii in general was much facilitated. These were the new reading rooms: (a) the catalog and bibliography room; (b) the rare book room (commonly known as "Reserve"); (c) the periodical read- ing room; and (d) the reading room in the Versailles Annex. Altogether, counting the geography room, the Department of Printed Books now has six reading rooms. The catalog and bibliography room was opened to the public in 1934 and considerably enlarged three years later. It is located under the general reading room, with which it is connected by a double staircase. In it has been brought together a collection of bibliographical reference tools which, it is believed, is unique in Europe. Although inspired in part by the Auskunftsbureau der deutschen Bibliotheken in Berlin, its total conception is novel and more suitable for the French research worker. The nucleus of the reference collection consists of all the catalogs of the Bibliotheque Nationale and catalogs of other libraries-French and foreign-the most important of which is the Library of Congress depository card catalog arranged by classification numbers. In addition to these, all the bibliographical material, formerly dispersed in the various sections and stacks of the Bibliotheque Nationale, has been grouped in this room, ar- ranged by subjects. A unique feature is the so-called "central documentation index" on cards, which was begun in 1930. Ar- ranged as a dictionary catalog, it includes cards for all the Bibliotheque Nationale catalogs and collections, for outside li- braries and research centers, their collections and specialization, bibliographies, and, since January I, 193I, analyticals for French and foreign library and bibliographical periodicals. The underlying idea was to provide a bibliography of bibliographies in card form supplemented by oral information. The newly opened rare book room, conveniently located be- tween the general reading room and the rare book stack, was designed particularly for the use of scholars. Its reference col- lection contains chiefly works dealing with the history of print- ing, book illustration, and bibliophily. Provisionally, it is used also for work in connection with the music collection. Ultimate- ly, it was planned to organize a separate room for music.
8I2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The periodical room, usually referred to as "Hemerotheque de Paris," was finally installed in the huge "oval room," which had seen various fortunes since work on it was begun at the turn of the century. A public reading room for a time, with a direct entrance from the street, it was closed when attendance dwin- dled. Later work was resumed, and it was remodeled to serve as a newspaper and periodical reading room. (There had been a great need for a separate periodical room, as previously only one table in the general reading room had been set aside for current periodicals.) Its oval shape, once the subject of bitter criticism, proved to be peculiarly suitable for the display of some six thousand current periodicals, grouped by subject. Any of these can be obtained within a few minutes. The adjoining stack is used for the larger part of the eighteenth- and nineteenth- century daily newspapers of Paris. The provincial newspapers, on the other hand, are stored in the new Versailles Annex. Readers find in the "oval room" a comprehensive collection of reference books on current topics, which includes a large group of yearbooks, directories, dictionaries, encyclopedias, and man- uals of the various branches of knowledge. Processing rooms and officesfor the staff.-For the first time in the history of the Bibliotheque Nationale adequate space was provided for the preliminary handling and sorting of the im- mense flood of books and periodicals pouring steadily into the library. A system of alcoves and specially designed shelving were planned to facilitate provisional sorting and distribution of the material. Modern offices with up-to-date equipment were provided for the librarians and library assistants. In order to make the recording of newly acquired material more speedy and more efficient, the cardex and related indexing methods were introduced, chiefly for periodicals and continuations. The sec- tion of legal deposit, which receives the entire output of the French publishing and printing industries, was reorganized in spacious and scientifically planned quarters conveniently lo- cated near the entrance of the building. Remodeling of the central stack.-The central book stack, built before 1870 by Labrouste, had long been considered a model of
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 813 its kind. However, contrary to expectations, it soon proved in- adequate for the mass of incoming books. Various expedients tending to increase the available storage space, such as addi- tional shelving in the aisles, were attempted, but failed to solve the problem for more than a short while. When all other possi- bilities had been exhausted, the attics were used for storage pur- poses-a most dangerous and impractical solution. Certain al- terations in the central stack had been undertaken in the twen- ties and were completed after 1930. The newly acquired space was, however, woefully insufficient for any length of time. Only a major structural operation could provide the necessary space for the coming years. This operation consisted in the construc- tion of a huge two-story underground stack under the old cen- tral book stack and along the two flanks of the building facing the Rue de Richelieu and the Rue des Petits-Champs. Simul- taneously new and more powerful foundations were built to support not only the additional weight of the underground stacks but also, sometime in the future, additions in height to the central stack. This technically difficult operation was carried out, like all the other alterations, without a day's interruption of the regular library service. Coincidentally entire collections had to be shifted several times. This provided the opportunity for a more systematic and at the same time more practical arrangement of the books, which in turn resulted in more efficient service to the readers. Newly installed book carriers, elevators, and a system of pneumatic tubes for transmission of request slips from the reading room to both old and new stacks contributed much to the generally recognized improvement of the service. Alto- gether, in the course of these alterations, some 20 kilometers (I2' miles) of new shelving were made available. The Versailles A{nnex.-The problem of space for printed matter could not be solved in a permanent manner within the Bibliotheque Nationale. Following the example of the British Museum, it was decided to transfer certain bulky and little-used collections (including provincial newspaper files and secondary periodicals of purely local interest) from the library building in
814 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Paris to an annex. This was built not in Paris, where no suitable site was available, but in Versailles. Architecturally this struc- ture is a departure from traditional conceptions. Its style is strictly functional. There are eight stories, two of which are basement floors with daylight partly provided through the use of so-called "English yards" (areas). An adjacent vacant lot of considerable size was to be used eventually for four additional buildings connected by galleries. This scheme permitted a single service division for all the buildings, representing a considerable saving in personnel. The first of these buildings was completed in 1934. It con- tains 20 kilometers (121 miles) of stacks, with a reading room for readers wishing to use the collections on the spot. However, this material is used more often in Paris, since there is a regular daily motor service between the library in Paris and the Ver- sailles Annex. The manuscripts department.-The Department of Manu- scripts, which is equaled in wealth only by the British Museum, demanded its share of improvements, since part of its priceless collections was still stored in attics. The upper part of a wing giving onto the court of honor was therefore rebuilt and lined with concrete in such a way as to resemble a huge safe, affording the maximum protection against fire as well as against theft. Any abnormal increase in temperature automatically starts off an extinguishing mechanism using a neutral gas absolutely harmless to documents. A number of extra decks in this sec- tion provide ample storage space for some time to come. The Department of Prints.-The alterations in this wing were by far the boldest and on a larger scale than any of the previous- ly described operations. First, the larger part of the print col- lection was temporarily moved to the mansion of Salomon de Rothschild, which had long housed the Art and Archeology Li- brary. Next a group of old buildings without architectural char- acter were demolished, leaving only the fasade standing. This was the only portion dating back to the middle of the seven- teenth century. Behind this period setting, work was begun on a modern structure specifically designed for its purpose. Eight
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 8I5 stories of stacks, of which three were underground, were to be topped by the public study room, lighted from above. This ar- rangement is thought to be entirely original. Completed, it would have been the largest prints room in existence. The original plan also provides for a permanent exhibit hall. Frangois Mansart's old lower gallery, extending under the Galerie Mazarine with its seventeenth-century decor, is the ideal setting for this. Its original style had been disfigured through clumsy additions. In I926 the generosity of Mrs. Florence Blumenthal made possible the expert restoration which has brought to light the original proportions and the delicately sculptured and painted ornaments. Used over a period of years as a public study room, this gallery would form a harmonious background for a continuous display of graphic art, thus con- stituting a museum of engraving, the first of its kind in France. INCREASE OF THE COLLECTIONS Acquisitions and gifts of outstanding importance have added to the wealth of the several departments, especially the manu- scripts division, to such an extent that this recent period will be remembered as one of the fortunate ones in the history of the library. Among the generous donors who have encouraged and sometimes actively shared the efforts of the Bibliotheque Na- tionale, the following may be mentioned: Mr. Gerschel, Mr. George Blumenthal of New York, and M. Henri de Rothschild for the Department of Printed Books; Mr. Seymour de Ricci, M. Allard du Chollet, and M. Henri de Rothschild for the De- partment of Manuscripts; M. C. de Beistegui for the Depart- ment of Medals; and M. Bejot and Sir David Salomons for the Prints Division. Since, according to French law, all books, pamphlets, periodi- cals, etc., printed in France must be deposited at the Bib- liotheque Nationale-this is called "Dep6t legal"-the library is naturally interested in the smooth and efficient functioning of this service. There was a steady improvement in this respect during the last ten years, following more stringent measures to enforce compliance with existing legislation. The average num-
8i6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ber of books annually deposited (excluding periodicals, music, and maps, which are reckoned separately) amounts to about 13,000 items. Deposits of periodicals were much improved fol- lowing the law of December 29, 1933, which called for deposit directly with the Bibliotheque Nationale. Indirectly, the com- pletion of the new periodical reading room and the opening of the Versailles Annex for storage contributed to this improve- ment, since they made possible a more effective system of check- ing lacunae. Book purchases were steadily increased as a result of con- sistently larger appropriations. These funds were used primari- ly to build up collections of foreign books and periodicals and to continue series. It was felt that the Bibliotheque Nationale should continue to fulfil its function of advancing learning and scholarship and must build for the future, leaving to the many specialized libraries of Paris the task of acquiring special mono- graphs and publications of temporary interest. The department was given an opportunity to bid at several important auction sales and to purchase a number of rare and valuable books for its "Reserve." Year after year, many gen- erous gifts came to this department from both French and for- eign individuals and from several institutions as well. The Bibliotheque Nationale regularly exchanged its publications with certain foreign publications. The maps and music sections spared no effort to build up systematically their modern collec- tions. They were fortunate in securing a number of rare items, which in recent times have usually gone to private collectors. The outstanding acquisitions of those last years, however, were made by the Department of Manuscripts. All its collec- tions were enriched, but most of all its collection of French man- uscripts. Certain groups of documents acquired, such as registers, char- tularies, charters, political papers, and correspondence, are im- portant for French historical research. Among these may be mentioned the letters of Marshal Turenne; those of Rewbell, a member of the revolutionary Convention; and those of General Boulanger. Of a more general historical interest are letters of
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 817 Catherine II, empress of Russia. Others concern French literary history from the Middle Ages to modern times; these include documents relating to Rabelais and La Fontaine, manuscripts of Flaubert, Zola, and Anatole France, and, most important in this group, a gift of over fifteen hundred letters of Voltaire; also the manuscripts of two of Flaubert's most famous novels, Salammbe and La Tentation de Saint Antoine, and the manu- scripts of Montesquieu's Esprit des lois and Alfred de Vigny's Chatterton. In the field of foreign literature there are the letters of Richard Wagner to Judith Gautier, poems by Kipling, and a number of Greek, Persian, and Armenian manuscripts. The Bibliotheque Nationale even had the good fortune of being able to add such choice items as the L6gendier de Saint-Petersbourg, the Petites heures d'Afnne de Bretagne, and the Livre d'heures de Jfean sans Peur to its admirable collection of illuminated manu- scripts. Special mention may be made of the much-publicized pur- chase of 318 letters of Napoleon to Marie-Louise in a London sale in 1934, for which parliament voted a special sum. These letters were immediately translated and published in both hemi- spheres. The autograph collection received as a gift Baron Hen- ri de Rothschild's valuable collection of over five thousand doc- uments. Acquisitions of prints and medals were made on a strictly systematic basis with a view to completing both old and new series, for which the preparation of catalogs was begun. Many a print or medal neglected by collectors takes on special sig- nificance when inserted in its proper place in a series. In addi- tion, a great many gifts were received. The Department of Prints owes to private generosity its boast of a collection in which the French contemporary school of engraving is repre- sented in full. CARE AND CONSERVATION OF THE COLLECTIONS Lack of personnel and of funds had been responsible in the past for much neglect in the physical care of the collections. A systematic campaign of cleaning and dusting was undertaken
8I8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and, whenever possible, the publications were bound. Ways and means were found to bind not only all current accessions but also part of the accumulated arrears. The appropriation for binding, previously amounting to 332,00o francs, was increased to 670,000 francs. However, the situation in this respect re- mains very serious, and special measures will have to be taken if the collections are to be preserved for posterity. CATALOGS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PROJECTS The learned character of an institution like the Bibliotheque Nationale should find its expression in the scholarly work which it produces and above all in the catalogs which its staff prepares and publishes. From this point of view the years from 1930 to 1940 were one of the most productive periods in its history. A distinction should be made between work of this type in- tended merely for internal use and that which is of interest to scholars at large. All librarians are duty bound to catalog the books intrusted to their care, but only collections of exceptional value or rarity call for the publication of catalogs in the form of printed volumes. The task of the Bibliotheque Nationale was therefore twofold: on the one hand, all current finding lists, card catalogs, and indexes were constantly improved; on the other hand, a number of catalogs were published which may be regarded as scholarly contributions to the best type of library literature. The cost of printing these catalogs amounted to about 300,000 francs in I930. This amount was doubled in 1939. Department of Printed Books.-The Bibliographie de la France is the only official catalog of current French book production. The bibliographical compilation was done at the Bibliotheque Nationale, while the Cercle de la Librairie was in charge of the publishing. A serious effort was made to meet the justified criti- cism concerning its shortcomings. Following the reform of the system of legal deposit in 1935, it was possible to cut down the delay in listing new publications, since deposit was being ef- fected more promptly and more universally. The number of pages was increased and there were included special sections for music, maps, prints, translations from foreign languages, new
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 819 periodicals, and doctoral dissertations (the latter since October, 1932). Several indexes, particularly a systematic index, should facilitate the use of this repertory. An attempt was made in 1937 to print the entries separately on cards of standard international size to be used by other li- braries for their catalogs, but lack of funds made it necessary to interrupt the experiment. The Bulletin des acquisitions etrangeres had been discontinued in I929 owing to lack of funds. It was resumed in 1931, and the intervening gap was filled in a few years. Special numbers were published for exceptionally large shipments of publications re- ceived from Canada and the Argentine Republic. Between 1930 and 1940, sixty-one volumes of the Catalogue general des livres imprime's (XCVIII-CLVIII, covering entries from "Liell" to "Rukser") were published. At the time war broke out, the end of this huge bibliographical enterprise, begun in I 897, was in sight. Had it been possible to maintain the out- put of the preceding years, the catalog would now be completed. The agreement reached in I927 by M. Roland-Marcel with a group of American libraries, and the subsequent financial as- sistance from the Rockefeller Foundation, went far toward help- ing achieve this goal. It was the policy of M. Cain's administration to facilitate in every possible way the work of research in the Bibliotheque Nationale. This could best be achieved by simplifying the com- plicated system of catalogs. To this end the following opera- tions were carried out: (a) the three series of catalogs for "Au- thors and anonymous works," 1882-94, i894-i925, and I925- 35, were consolidated into a single alphabet; (b) a catalog of liter- ary works by title was established; (c) beginning with 1936, all entries were made on cards of standard international format; and (d) beginning with I936, the catchword catalog was re- placed by a subject catalog arranged systematically. Of the special catalogs, both the Index to the previously pub- lished Catalogue de /'histoire de France and the Index to the Catalogue des factums ... anterieurs a J790 were completed. Work was resumed on Isnard's Catalogue des actes royaux and
820 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume II was finally published. In line with the policy of com- plementing the general author catalog by subject catalogs de- scribing various groups of the collections corresponding to the large sections of the classification adopted, the publication of a Catalogue de l'histoire de la Revolutionfranfaise by Andre Martin and Gerard Walter was undertaken. Three volumes have ap- peared to date. The catalog, which will be one of the major bib- liographical contributions of the library, will be complete in five volumes. The new system adopted for the classification and preserva- tion of periodicals of every description provided the basis for a large-scale inventory of this enormous mass of material, hitherto incompletely and unscientifically listed. A grant from the Caisse de la Recherche Scientifique enabled the library to en- gage a staff of trained library workers for the compilation of a union catalog of periodicals in Paris libraries. A similar method, made possible by financial assistance from the Caisse de la Recherche Scientifique, was used for the cata- loging of the music collection, large sections of which remain as yet unexplored. A staff of specialists was engaged, and a set of specific rules for the treatment of the material was elaborated through the combined efforts of professional librarians and mu- sicologists. As a result, part of the collection at the Bibliotheque Nationale has already been cataloged, while work on the collec- tions in the Opera and Conservatory libraries was making good progress in 1940. Since these two libraries were then under the same administration as the Bibliotheque Nationale, complete uniformity of treatment was possible. The growing need for an authoritative list, together with in- sistent requests from certain foreign countries, especially from the United States, was the immediate motive for undertaking in 1938 the inventory of French official publications. The Bib- liotheque Nationale was designated by decree to take charge of the compilation and the publication of the list. As a first step, detailed questionnaires were sent to every government depart- ment and institution. This was followed up by personal check- ing of titles in the different departmental libraries and the of- ficial printing establishments. The first part, dealing with the
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONILE 821 central administration, has been compiled and was to have ap- peared in print in June, 1940. Part two was to include the pub- lications of learned bodies, maps, and charts; part three, the publications of the departments and municipalities; part four, colonial publications. Simultaneously with the bibliographical work, efforts were made to collect all current official publica- tions as a nucleus for the planned central administrative li- brary. It was hoped that the inventory would, above all, facili- tate international exchange of official publications. This ex- change has not functioned efficiently in France and has been the object of justified complaints. Department of Manuscripts.-The manuscript collections of the Bibliotheque Nationale transcend in importance the needs of a purely local group of scholars. During the last ten years a number of new catalogs were published, based on a scholarly method which has won world-wide recognition. A new revised edition of the Catalogue alphab6tique des livres mis a la disposition des lecteurs ... suivi de la liste des catalogues usuels was issued in 1933. It constitutes a bibliographical hand- book of reference works, chiefly in the humanities, for a large manuscripts collection. Five volumes of the alphabetical index of the Catalogue general des manuscritsfranfais, prepared by A. Vidier and P. Perrier, were published and the Inventaire som- maire des nouvelles acquisitions des fonds latin et franfais was completed. A new edition of the Liste des recueils defac-simil6s et des reproductions de manuscrits conserv6s d la Bibliotheque Nationale was prepared and published by H. Omont and Ph. Lauer. Also the following: Volume IV of the Catalogue dufonds tib6tain; the Repertoire du Tandjur by Marcelle Lalou; the Catalogue des manuscrits de la collection Bliss by H. Omont, M. Auvray, and M. Bondois; the Catalogue des manuscrits turcs by E. Blochet; Volume IV of the Catalogue des manuscrits persans by the same author; and the final volume of the Catalogue des manuscrits de la collection Clairambault by Ph. Lauer. Surpassing all of these in scope and importance, two major undertakings of the greatest interest to scholars all over the world were finally got well under way: the catalog of Latin manuscripts and the catalog of oriental collections. Since an en-
822 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY terprise of this magnitude goes far beyond the ordinary means of the Bibliotheque Nationale, an arrangement similar to that adopted for the Union catalog of periodicals and for the Music catalog was adopted. A staff of specialists not regularly con- nected with the Bibliotheque Nationale and remunerated through a grant from the Caisse de la Recherche Scientifique was put to work under the direction of officials in the Depart- ment of Manuscripts. The first volume of the catalog of Latin manuscripts was issued in 1939. It was estimated that there would be twenty volumes in all. Simultaneously work on the oriental collections made good progress and several catalogs (specifically, those dealing with Tibetan, Chinese, and Ethiopian manuscripts) were in press in 1940. Department of Medals.-The more important catalogs pub- lished during the past ten years are the following: Le Tresor du cabinet des antiques by Jean Babelon (3 vols.); Les Pierres gravees; guide du visiteur by David-Lesuffleur; Catalogue des monnaies franfaises: monnaies cap6tiennes, Volume II, by A. Dieudonne; Catalogue des jetons des princes et princesses de la Maison de France by P. Pradel; Catalogue de la collection de Luynes: monnaies grecques, Volume III, by Jean Babelon; and catalogs of the Beistegui and Froehner collections, the latter by Louis Robert. Department of Prints.-Of the Inventaire du fonds franfais, seven volumes were issued: Graveurs, XVJP siecle by A. Linzeler and J. Adhemar (2 vols. and Index); Graveurs, XVIIIe siecle by M. Roux (3 vols.); and Inventaire du fonds franfais apre's i8oo by Jean Laran (2 vols.). The first volume of Graveurs du XVIIe siecle was in course of preparation by R. Weigert. Other publi- cations include: L'(Euvre gravee d'Eugene Bejot by Jean Laran; Inventaire ge6ne6ral des dessins des ecoles du nord by Frits Lugt and J. Vallery-Radot; Estampes et dessins de Corot by P.-A. Le- moisne and Jean Laran; Le Chateau de Fontainebleau by Her- bet; and Inventaire analytique de la collection de Vinck, Volume V, by A.-M. Rosset. The Arsenal Library.-Turning to the Arsenal Library, at least one catalog was recently published, the Catalogue des livres
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE 823 de musique by La Laurencie and Amedee Gastoue. It includes both manuscripts and printed books. THE STAFF OF THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE Fully conscious of the rank of the Bibliotheque Nationale among the great libraries of the world, the administrator chose his collaborators with the greatest possible care in order to main- tain the scholarly reputation of the library intrusted to his di- rection. Over a number of years, the Bibliotheque Nationale sought to enrol the services of young scholars specializing in some branch of learning for which the universities offered no career, such as specialists in numismatics, historical geography, or history of the book, certain orientalists, and certain types of musicologists. MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES OF THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE Exhibits.-Over fifty exhibits were organized at the library during the last ten years. In these, all the departments played their part. The displays were extremely varied, in size as well as in subject matter and in form of presentation. Some were organized to commemorate an event, such as the founding of the College de France or the French Academy; a school of literature, such as symbolism; the anniversary of some great writer, French or foreign, such as Rabelais, Calvin, Des- cartes, Corneille, Goethe; or some outstanding statesman, such as George Washington or Gambetta. Others were planned to illustrate some particular aspect of art, such as the art of Iran, the French miniature painters, or the work of a specific artist, as Pisanello, Jacques Callot, Francisco Goya, or Corot. It is im- possible to mention them all. What they had in common was the individual character of the subject selected and the truly scientific preparation of each display, as reflected in the various catalogs published for the occasion. Several among these, the fruit of painstaking research, could well take the place of bib- liographical or pictorial handbooks of the subject. There was such a demand for these catalogs that several were already out of print in 1940. During this same time the Bibliotheque Na-
824 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tionale participated in many expositions organized by the Louvre and other French museums, as well as in several inter- national expositions held in London, Milan, Leningrad, Co- logne, Warsaw, and New York. Library co-operation and co-operative bibliography.-The co- operation of the Bibliotheque Nationale in widely varying fields was sought by French and foreign libraries. First, in execution of resolutions adopted by various international organizations and congresses, the Bibliotheque Nationale was appointed of- ficially as headquarters for the French service of interlibrary loans. In the last years these loans became more frequent and requests were filled with greater speed as the general service in the library improved. Second, the photoduplication service was reorganized for the purpose of facilitating research and making available to French and foreign scholars material ordinarily not within their reach. The old workroom, which had long been inadequate, was re- placed in 1935 by a large laboratory equipped with the most modern apparatus. However, it was decided to subordinate other methods of reproduction to the microfilm, which, it was felt, held the greatest promise. Public interest in this fairly re- cent development had been aroused by the demonstration made by an American group in the Library Section of the Paris Ex- position in 1937. With the generous assistance of the Rockefel- ler Foundation, microfilming and reading apparatus was ac- quired and installed. The Bibliotheque Nationale was instru- mental in obtaining the establishment of an official microfilm committee in France, under the chairmanship of the distin- guished physicist, Fabry, and comprising several well-known scientists as well as users of archives and libraries. Through this committee technical and other improvements were made and contact with specialists in other countries was maintained. It was chiefly through the example and the influence of the Bib- liotheque Nationale that the use of the microfilm has gained ground so rapidly in France. Third, in an effort to build up systematically the collections of French public libraries, the minister of education intrusted to the Bibliotheque Nationale the management of a considerable
THE BIBLIOTHEQUE N4TIONALE 825 sum of money to be used for the purchase of books for these li- braries. For this purpose specially selected lists recommending the best books in each field were prepared by the Bibliotheque Nationale and additions to the various libraries were made from these lists. A similar scheme was worked out in I936 with a view to dis- tributing representative French books abroad, in both the major foreign libraries and French libraries abroad. The Bibliotheque Nationale was called upon by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to undertake the bibliographical part of the plan and prepare lists of suitable books. Finally, French activity in the field of "documentation" or information service as distinct from library service had been characterized by much duplication of effort and extreme disper- sion, brought about by a total lack of co-ordination. A first at- tempt to improve the situation was made by federating a cer- tain number of information centers under the name of Union Fransaise des Organismes de Documentation. However, ef- ficient co-operation and a co-ordinated effort toward practical solutions were not achieved until after the Paris Exposition and the International Documentation Conference in 1937. The out- come of this was the establishment of an official French com- mittee of documentation under the chairmanship of the admin- istrator-general of the BibliothUque Nationale. This committee took an active part in the subsequent two International Docu- mentation Conferences, at Oxford in 1938 and Zurich in 1939. The committee began preparation of a Guide Franfais de la docu- mentation, a sort of encyclopedic handbook for the research worker, combining the best features of Minerva, Tassy-Leris, Besterman, and the ASLIB directory, and a special course of training for information service was being organized by the committee in I939 and 1940. THE BIBLIOTHEQUE NATIONALE AND THE WAR When war broke out in September, 1939, many of the activi- ties just described were slowed down; others, following the call to the colors of many officials, had to be interrupted altogether. The remaining librarians not only carried on but cheerfully ac-
826 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cepted new responsibilities. Among other things, a special effort was made to constitute a war collection which was to be as com- plete as possible. This demanded unceasing vigilance and con- stantly renewed efforts, since much of the war material was of a fugitive nature. The weightiest problem, however, was the adequate protec- tion of invaluable collections against the manifold hazards of total warfare. During several years preceding the war a system- atic study had been made of the problems involved in case of sudden hostilities. The master-plan was worked out in all its details at the time of the September crisis of 1938. By that tinme all rare and valuable items had been listed. Special cases, each with its number and destination clearly marked, were held in readiness for an emergency, while storage places in the provinces had been assigned to each group of material. lThus, when the emergency actually arose toward the end of August, 1939, the plan for evacuation was carried out in perfect order and accord- ing to schedule. Simultaneously, storage space had been pre- pared in the basement and the cellars for the mass of books and documents remaining in Paris. These recently completed rein- forced cellars were also put into use as air-raid shelters for the staff and the readers. In accordance with the government's instructions for "pas- sive defense" certain measures were taken, such as limiting the number of readers to the number for which accommodation in the shelters was available. The hours of opening had to be reduced on account of the blackout, since it was impossible to achieve effective camouflage of light in the main reading room with its huge glass dome. Finally, a microfilm was made of the partially completed music catalog on cards, of which there was only one copy. The original was stored outside Paris, while the micro- film reproduction was to be used in the Bibliotheque Nationale., I M. Julien Cain was dismissed from his post by a decree of the Vichy government dated July 23, I940. His house in Louveciennes is occupied by the Germans. His apart- ment in Paris was searched several times by the Gestapo. Since M. Cain is a member of the Jewish race, all professional activity is denied him by virtue of the Nazi-inspired anti-Semitic legislation of Vichy. The data for the above report were furnished by M. Cain at the time the author left Paris in December, I940. Shortly after, he was arrested by the Germans and, according to latest reports, has been deported to a con- centration camp in eastern Europe.