T HE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 38 APRIL 1968 Number 2 CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE: PIONEER IN LIBRARY EXTENSION MELISSA ANN BRISLEY C ORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE spent nearly half her long and pro- ductive life as a librarian-first in Illinois and Wisconsin and later in Oregon. In her twenty-four years as head of the Oregon State Library, she built, almost singlehandedly, one of the finest state library systems in the na- tion. As a library leader in the early years of the profession, she participated in many experiments and was herself the author of important innovations in library service. Her appearance, "small in stature, blond, pink and white, and blue-eyed,"' concealed a character de- scribed as "a human dynamo with a mind that works like harnessed light- ning."' EARLY YEARS Cornelia Marvin was born in Monti- cello, Iowa, on December 26, 1873, the daughter of Charles Elwell Marvin and Cornelia Moody Marvin. She was the second of five children, with a sister and three brothers. The family moved to Rochester, Minnesota, and then to St. Paul, where Cornelia attended high school. A combination of her father's failure in business and her mother's tuberculosis caused her parents to move to Tacoma, Washington. During this period, around 1890, the children were sent to various relatives or boarding schools. Cornelia joined her parents in Tacoma for a time, while she was re- covering from an illness. When her mother died in Tacoma in 1892, Cornelia was apparently alienated from her father and eager to manage her own affairs. In the fall of 1893 she went to live with a Mrs. Porter in Chi- cago, where she acted as a "mother's helper" and took courses in such sub- jects as French history and ancient drama in the extension program of the University of Chicago. Twenty-year-old Cornelia was avidly engaged in the pursuit of knowledge, obsessed by the amount she had to ac- complish. As she wrote her younger sister, Mabel, "I am afraid I worship 'culture'-and 'knowledge' combined as much as some do money-only the sin isn't as gross a one."3 Her interests lay 1 Dorothy Johansen, The Library and the Liberal Tradition (Corvallis: Friends of the Library, Ore- gon State College, 1959), p. 4. 2Unidentified newspaper clipping, apparently from Claude Ingle's column, Gazette-Times (Cor- vallis, Ore.), early 1930's, in Cornelia Marvin Pierce Papers, Oregon State Library, Salem, cited here- after as "C. M. Pierce Papers." 3 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, ca. Febru- ary 24, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 125
126 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in the study of drama, literature, and history. She planned to devote the spring of 1894 to Hawthorne, French history, music, and drama and the sum- mer to American authors of prose, poet- ry, and a little history. Her favorite course was ancient drama. She thought of becoming a literary critic like Low- ell, or even possibly a dramatist. "If I made use of work and will, I might write tragedies . . . Maybe though I possess only insight for good criticism but have no productive power."' After attending a reception at the University of Chicago Cornelia was re- solved to go there some day. "Why should anyone go to a girls' college to be taught by some woman who has made no reputation for herself as broad or great, when it is possible to study with the greatest men of the time, the most famous scholars, in a city which offers such great advantages. Imagine being cooped up in Smith or Wellesley when one might have free range over all Chicago in music, art, etc.! 7' When she remembered her life in Tacoma she particularly valued Chicago. "I felt a great tide of thankfulness sweep over me because I was not so far away from civilization and condemned to Tacoma papers, Tacoma gossip, and Tacoma ideas."6 In between the concerts, operas, and lectures she found time to become de- pressed because "my purposes swallow themselves and I doubt the value of my aims and do not know the real plan of life."7 She complained that she had a good mind and high ambitions but had no purpose toward which to direct them. Owing to her father's failure in busi- ness, she had very little money and could not afford to enter the University of Chicago. The possibilities of mar- riage did not appeal to her. "I am re- solved to be a bachelor for I won't have a family to 'rear'-much better for me and for the 'family.' "' Significantly the only men she found attractive were her professors. However, she apparently felt herself incapable of attracting this type of man. "If I were older and charming, I should aim high and try to make such a man admire me. But as I am, I want none of them. I should be ill satisfied with anything less-and couldn't condescend."9 She preferred the independence of a working woman and felt a duty to assist her family. "I have braced myself for a long struggle I shall send Mabel and George to College. For all I've a family on my hands-I must do or die."10 Faced with the necessity of becom- ing self-supporting and the immediate impossibility of a college education, Cornelia decided to enter the library school at the new Armour Institute of Technology. "A year in college might not cost more than a year in Library work but by the latter plan I am pre- pared for anything and will have gained some knowledge beside. It keeps up the study of literature and has a twofold value in the end.""1 Intending to go to the University of Chicago after she earned some money in library work, 4Ibid. 5 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, April 17, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 6 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, March 27, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. ' Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, April 17, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 'Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, March 27, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 'Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, March 5, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 10 Cornelia Marvin to Julia Bothwell, ca. March, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. " Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, January 7, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 127 Cornelia consoled herself by remem- bering the "hosts of women thirty and over, brilliant women and earnest stu- dents"'2 she had met in her visits to the University of Chicago campus. ARMOUR INSTITUTE The Armour Institute was estab- lished by a gift of Philip D. Armour in January, 1895. The Rev. F. W. Gun- saulus, who had inspired Armour's ges- ture, was chosen president. In addition to other types of technical courses, the institute offered a one-year course in library work for high school graduates. The establishment of the school and the selection of Katharine L. Sharp as director was due in a large measure to Melvil Dewey. As Dewey recalled sev- eral years later, "My old pastor F. W. Gonzales [sic], a member of the Boston Shakespeare Club of which I was presi- dent, came to Albany and said, 'In old Boston days yu fild my hed with cer- tain dreams that ar now coming true. Armour Institute and I want the best man in America to start the library and the library school and carry out yur ideas.' I replied "the best man in America is a woman, and she is in the next room."'3 Katharine Sharp, Dewey's favorite pupil'4 and virtually adopted daugh- ter,'5 was the outstanding graduate of the Albany Library School in the class of 1892.16 At the age of twenty-seven, just out of library school herself, she established the fourth school for the education of librarians in the United States.17 The school flourished under her direction and in 1897 was trans- ferred to Urbana, where it became the Illinois State Library School, granting the degree of bachelor of library sci- ence. Library schools were in their infancy and in the eyes of many librarians had yet to prove their worth. Andrew Car- negie, although eager to bring about the expansion of library service, re- fused assistance to the New York State Library School because he had been convinced that formal training was unnecessary.'8 The Albany school had been criticized for offering "theoretical" instruction, and possibly to avoid such criticism the new library training course at Armour was extremely practical. Katharine Sharp's account of the cur- riculum took care to justify formal training as opposed to the apprentice- ship method, contending that training made the students more adaptable and general library service more intelligent. The crux of the argument was that the student had the benefit of comparative study, while the apprentice became familiar in the ways of one library only. At Armour it was the policy of the school that each teacher should be en- gaged in active library work, and the students took turns working as assist- ants to the various staff members. An important part of the training facilities was the "museum," the nucleus of which was the comparative exhibit of library 12 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, March 18, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. 13 Melvil Dewey, as quoted in Laurel Ann Grot- zinger, The Power and the Dignity: Librarianship and Katharine Sharp (New York: Scarecrow Press, 1965), pp. 59-60. 1 Cornelia Marvin Pierce, "Oregon Started Read- ing When State Library Came," Capitol Journal (Salem, Ore.), August 1, 1955, p. 6. 1` Grotzinger, op. cit. (see n. 13 above), p. x. 1" "In her 2 years at Albany she was so easily first that it was taken for granted that prizes and honors went to her" (Melvil Dewey, as quoted in ibid., p. 40). "7Albany, 1887; Pratt, 1890; Drexel, 1892. 18 Sarah K. Vann, Training for Librarianship before 1923 (Chicago: American Library Associa- tion, 1961), p. 58.
128 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY appliances, blanks, forms, and models prepared by the New York State Li- brary School under the direction of Miss Sharp for the ALA exhibit at the Columbian Exposition in 1893.19 A STUDENT AT ARMOUR After persuading her father to supply the $500 she needed for the year at Armour, Cornelia began library school September 20, 1894. An earlier inspira- tion (to find a "nice French family to live with" in order to advance her study of that language) gave way to a more prosaic solution. She shared a flat at 3447 Prairie Avenue with a young friend, Julia Bothwell.'0 As in the other early library schools, the emphasis was on some aspects which are now regarded as chiefly clerical.2' The nineteen students who began work in the fall of 1894 attended classes in book selection, cataloging, loan sys- tems, elementary reference, shelf list- ing, and library handwriting. Great em- phasis was given to "technique," partly because it was the only part of library work which had become in any way standardized. However, as Cornelia's famous classmate Margaret Mann re- called, the teaching was "unquestion- ably too intelligent" to ignore the rea- sons underlying procedures.22 In addi- tion, Katharine Sharp was always alert to enrich the courses with lectures by visiting librarians, local specialists, pub- lishers, booksellers, or bookbinders. The students were exposed to the grow- ing interest in library extension by li- brarians from Illinois and Wisconsin.23 Cornelia apparently never regretted her decision to enter the Armour In- stitute Library School. Library work gave her the direction she had craved- a challenging field in need of her fine mind and great energy. Cornelia's de- sire for a college education was prob- ably diminished by the example of Katharine Sharp, with her degree from Northwestern and her great intellectual gifts, who abandoned a teaching career to enter library work. The "higher side" of library work-the library as a great educational force of modern times-was emphasized at Armour, probably in much the terms that Katharine Sharp used in a 1898 article, "Librarianship as a Profession." "There is no work more absorbing, and its followers feel that it is second only to the church in its possibilities for good."24 The librar- ians of the early period were often re- formers who saw in the concept of the public library a powerful force for change, for questioning the value of present conditions, and for revising old ideas. Whatever their political and so- cial convictions, they believed passion- ately in the value of good books placed in the right hands. They were con- vinced that, as Cornelia put it, "back of the institution there should be the zeal and spirit which are supposed to accompany missionary work."25 ' Grotzinger, op. cit. (see n. 13 above), p. 56; University of Illinois, State Library School, Report and Student Record, 1893-1903 (Champaign and Urbana, 1903), p. 9. 20 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, January 7, 1894; Cornelia Marvin to Julia Bothwell, Septem- ber 11, 1894, C. M. Pierce Papers. ' Margaret Mann, "A History of the Armour Institute Library School, 1893-1897," Fifty Years of Education for Librarianship ("Illinois Contri- butions to Librarianship," No. 1 [Urbana: Univer- sity of Illinois Press, 1943]), p. 14. 22 Ibid., p. 15. 23 Ibid., p. 18. 24 Katharine Sharp, "Librarianship as a Profes- sion," Public Libraries (January, 1898), 3:7. 25 Cornelia Marvin, "As It Was in the Beginning: Frank Avery Hutchins," Public Libraries (April, 1925), 30:187.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 129 EARLY PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES In 1895, Katharine Sharp decided that the library school was prepared to offer an additional year which could lead to a two-year diploma. As a result there was actually no class of 1895; those students who did not wish to con- tinue were awarded one-year certifi- cates and listed as members of the class of 1896.26 Cornelia apparently elected not to continue for the second- year degree, preferring to become an "assistant" in September, 1895. In January, 1896, Cornelia organized the Township High School Library in Princeton, Illinois, and went on to or- ganize the St. Cloud, Minnesota, normal school library in February and March of the same year. By this time, her sister, Mabel, who had caught some of Cornelia's enthusiasm for library work, had finished her term (1895-96) at Armour. They spent July and August together at the Davenport (Iowa) Pub- lic Library with Cornelia as "organizer" and Mabel as cataloger. On their re- turn to Armour for the 1896-97 term, Mabel became an "assistant" and Cor- nelia was promoted to reference librar- ian and instructor in reference and bib- liogra.phy.27 Cornelia's duties at Armour were ex- tremely varied. After Katharine Sharp convinced the University of Chicago Extension Division of the need for classes in library economy, Cornelia gave one of the first series of lectures in January, 1897. Speaking to a class of clubwomen, teachers, and library trustees in Geneva, Illinois, Cornelia covered virtually the whole range of library activities in a dozen lectures.28 According to her, she also taught the first library course ever offered in the care and use of U.S. documents (even Miss Sharp attended) and conducted the first library institute in Indianapolis in 1896.29 In 1894 the Armour students had be- come interested in the unsuccessful at- tempt of the Chicago Children's Aid Society to supply home libraries in de- prived areas. After the society turned over all its materials to the students, they solicited more books and money and supervised the distribution and use of materials.30 Cornelia was placed in charge of the home libraries.3' She re- called that one of the most interesting and rewarding ex- periences of my Armour days was the estab- lishment and carrying forward of the "home li- braries" in the Chicago stock yards district. I told the famous founder, P. D. Armour, of my plans and dreams for taking good books to the children in those homes and he told me to go ahead, he would furnish the money. I worked with Miss Mary McDowell, well known head of the stock yards settlement house. I took one of the home centers, and my sister and other library students volunteered for services in the other centers. This brought me into touch with Jane Addams and Hull House. I also met Flor- ence Kelley, famous as liberator through legis- lation of laboring women and children.32 Cornelia's duties at Armour also in- cluded the administration of the Bu- reau of Information of the Illinois State Library Association.33 The bureau was created by Katharine Sharp as a means of promoting library interest in the state until the Illinois legislature could ' University of Illinois, op. cit. (see n. 19 above), p. 44. 27 Ibid., pp. 46 and 48. ' Grotzinger, op. cit. (see n. 13 above), p. 224. 9 Pierce, op. cit. (see n. 14 above), p. 6. ' University of Illinois, op. cit. (see n. 19 above), p. 22. 31 Grotzinger, op. cit. (see n. 13 above), p. 76. 32 Pierce, op. cit. (see n. 14 above), p. 6. 3 Grotzinger, op. cit. (see n. 13 above), p. 76.
130 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pass legislation for a library commis- sion.34 All citizens of Illinois interested in library affairs were invited to send inquiries on library matters to the bu- reau located at Armour, where they would be answered by experts familiar with the newest techniques and the latest activities of the library profes- sion. After the initial response tapered off, the library bureau performed a use- ful function in collecting information on library services and statistics. The bureau was also the official organization behind the library lectures held under the auspices of the University of Chi- cago.35 ILLINOIS AND WISCONSIN When the Armour Institute Library School moved to Urbana in 1897, Cor- nelia became the librarian of the Sco- ville Institute of Oak Park, Illinois.36 The institute, a gift to the village of a successful son, housed a gymnasium, classrooms, and other community facili- ties as well as a library. There is little information available concerning the years Cornelia spent in Oak Park, al- though she recalled that two facts made a deep impression. The first was the great value of women's club work in a community (she retained an honorary membership in this club for the rest of her life); the second was the "impor- tance of fixing in the young the habit of the use and enjoyment of libraries."37 In the summer of 1897, while still librarian of the Scoville Institute, Cor- nelia replaced Katharine Sharp as the head of the Wisconsin Library Com- mission Summer School of Library Sci- ence. The mushrooming number of small public libraries made it impera- tive that some method be evolved for disseminating the elementary tech- niques of library practice to hosts of women for whom apprentice classes or regular library training schools were out of the question. The summer school idea, originated at Amherst College by William I. Fletcher in 1891,38 spread to Wisconsin in 1895. Inspired by an address by Katharine Sharp at the fourth conference of the Wisconsin Li- brary Association, Senator James H. Stout underwrote the expenses of a four-week Summer School in Library Economy.39 A similar course, held in the summer of 1896 for six weeks, was also financed by Stout.40 The school, made self-supporting in 1897 by the charge of a fifteen-dollar fee, was placed under Cornelia's direction. Six- teen young ladies followed the course described as "the treatment of a book in logical order through all processes in the library, from the time it is added to the accession or invoice book, until it has been classified, cataloged, loaned to reader, repaired, and rebound, with 24 lessons in the Dewey and Cutter classifications."41 In addition to a series of special lectures and visits to the his- torical, city, and university libraries in Madison, the beginning librarians were thoroughly indoctrinated with "the li- brary spirit." The summer sessions were a great success, and in April, 1899, the Wis- 34 Ibid., p. 211. 5 Ibid., pp. 214-15. 36 Katharine Sharp's library career began here when she was placed in charge of the library at its opening in October, 1888 (ibid., p. 33). S Pierce, op. cit. (see n. 14 above), p. 6. 8 Vann, op. cit. (see n. 18 above), p. 65. 39 Ibid., p. 77. 40 First Biennial Report of the State Library Commission of Wisconsin, 1895-96 (Madison, Wis., 1896), p. 14. 41 Second Biennial Report of the Free Library Commission of Wisconsin, 1897-98 (Madison, Wis., 1898), p. 24.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 131 consin legislature passed a law author- izing the Library Commission to con- duct a "Summer School for Library Training . . . and to hold librarians' institutes in various parts of the state in order to train librarians of public, school and traveling libraries to make wiser and more effective use of the li- braries in their charge."42 With part of the increased appropriation the com- mission decided to employ another of- ficer, and Cornelia was hired as "Li- brary Instructor and Director of the Summer School of Library Training." She assumed her new duties in July, 1899. Each summer the scope and value of the course increased. The summer ses- sion of 1900 lasted for eight weeks and was attended by some forty students, thirteen from states other than Wiscon- sin. Each day the students spent two hours in lecture and four hours work- ing in the sample library. Lectures for the first four weeks covered reference work, general library economy, business methods, and children's literature; cata- loging and classification covered the last four weeks.43 By 1902, Cornelia had put into opera- tion no less than three summer sessions. The elementary course of eight weeks was limited to twenty-six students, only experienced people or those under defi- nite appointment to positions admitted. Of these, twenty-one were from Wis- consin, and over fifty well-qualified li- brarians from other states were refused because of lack of room and instructors. An assistant was engaged to handle the elementary instruction, while Cornelia taught the more advanced material. Her primary attention was devoted to the eighteen students enrolled in a supple- mentary course, open to former stu- dents who had done creditable work since leaving the school. The subject matter of this course was largely deter- mined by the response of the students to preliminary circulars asking what work was most needed-cataloging, practical book buying, subject bibli- ography, children's work, and Wiscon- sin documents. The third course, a three-week session in the handling and use of public documents, was taught by Adelaid Hasse, chief of the Documents Department of the New York Public Library.44 Largely because of the immense suc- cess of the summer school, the Wiscon- sin Library Commission determined to establish a permanent library school. By 1906 it offered a summer school and established a one-year program which later developed into the Library School of the University of Wisconsin. Of all the summer schools, only the one in Wisconsin developed into a regular li- brary school45-for this, Cornelia was in a large measure responsible. WISCONSIN LIBRARY COMMISSION If the period at Armour Institute gave Cornelia professional purpose and direction, then the years in Wisconsin provided her with a political and so- cial ideology which was essentially the "Wisconsin idea"-the attempts by such leaders as La Follette to return control of American governments, whether state and local or national, to the citizens and, at the same time, to 42 Third Biennial Report of the Free Library Commission of Wisconsin, 1899-1900 (Madison, Wis., 1900), p. 24. 43 Ibid., p. 16. 4 The expenses of the last two courses were cov- ered by a bequest of J. D. Witter of Grand Rapids, Wis. Fourth Biennial Report of the Free Library Commission of Wisconsin, 1901-1902 (Madison, Wis., 1902), p. 26. " Vann, op. cit. (see n. 18 above), p. 76.
132 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY educate those and future citizens to the proper use of their governments, in- cluding equitable distribution of wealth, the elimination of special privileges of all kinds, and the control of business to serve the public interest.i6 The University of Wisconsin under the leadership of Charles Van Hise de- veloped the "Wisconsin idea" with a vigorous extension program which would reach people all over the state- correspondence courses, housekeepers' conferences, farmers' institutes, and experimental stations. Governor La Fol- lette appointed experts from the uni- versity whenever possible to serve on important boards of the state and an- ticipated the "braintrust" of FDR by the organization of the "Saturday Lunch Club," where the governor, state officers, and various legislators met with university men such as Van Hise, Com- mons, Ely, and McCarthy to discuss problems of the state.47 The Wisconsin Library Commission was created in the belief that the people of the state needed free and convenient access to books, to the storehouses of information which would prepare them to make the intelligent decisions of which their leaders thought them capa- ble. The reverence the leaders felt for the "expert," the efficient administrator trained in the most recent developments in his field, led to the conviction that all who worked with libraries should be trained. The Library Commission brought Cornelia to Wisconsin as "in- structor" not only to conduct the sum- mer school but also to travel over the state conducting "institutes" for the farmers' wives who managed the travel- ing libraries, local library trustees who needed guidance in making decisions, and anyone else who was interested. In addition, she visited the small public li- braries, advising on establishment, re- organization, and extension of their services. Looking back on her career, Cornelia counted herself fortunate to have "come under the inspiration and to have the friendship of some of the greatest pio- neers who shaped library practice and library training."48 Katharine Sharp was the first of these "inspirations." In the members of the Wisconsin Library Commission there were others-espe- cially Frank Avery Hutchins. FRANK AVERY HUTCHINS The head of the Library Commission, Hutchins has been called the "most ob- scure big man" in Wisconsin history and probably deserves credit for initiat- ing many aspects of the "Wisconsin idea."49 As the young editor of the Beaver Dam Argus in 1884, he had been instrumental in the establishment of a free public library-through his efforts, one of the first in the country with open stacks. From 1891 to 1895, Hutchins was township library clerk in the State Department of Education, where he di- rected the operation of the school li- braries of the state. He was a leader in the creation of the Wisconsin Library Association in 1891 and became a mem- ber of the ALA in 1893. At the Chicago Fair in 1893, Hutchins heard of Melvil Dewey's efforts to stimulate the forma- tion of libraries in small towns by ship- ping groups of books, which could be rotated from community to commu- 46 Robert M. La Follette, La Follette's Autobiog- raphy: A Personal Narrative of Political Experi- ences (Madison, Wis.: Robert M. La Follette Co., 1911), p. 32. 47 Ibid. 48 Pierce, op. cit. (see n. 14 above), p. 6. 4 Alan Edmond Kent, "Frank Avery Hutchins: Promoter of 'The Wisconsin Idea,' " Wilson Li- brary Bulletin (September, 1955), 30:73.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 133 nity.50 Hutchins seized upon the idea as a means of maintaining a continual sup- ply of reading material for rural areas and villages incapable of supporting a library. Unable to obtain state support for such a venture, Hutchins formed a partnership with State Senator James H. Stout, who supplied the capital for sixteen libraries of thirty volumes each.5' From this small beginning, the idea of traveling libraries spread across the nation. In 1895, Hutchins' bill, which was introduced by Stout, resulted in the cre- ation of a state Library Commission similar to those operating in some New England states. Hutchins was named chairman of the commission with a $500 appropriation. Assisted by Stout's gen- erosity, he gave his services full time, without salary, until the commission re- ceived an appropriation of $4,000 in May, 1897, and he became the salaried secretary of the agency.52 Hutchins' co-worker during this peri- od was Lutie Eugenia Stearns, "librar- ian, suffragette, pacifist, and plain speaker."53 An early member of the Wisconsin Library Association, she con- vinced Hutchins of the need for a li- brary commission after she had heard glowing reports of the work of such agencies in other states at the ALA Conference of 1894.54 When Hutchins became secretary of the commission, Lutie Stearns was appointed "library organizer." She was the perfect com- plement to the retiring Hutchins-it was once remarked that if Hutchins was the spiritual force in the early Wiscon- sin library movement, Lutie Stearns was the incarnation of its kinetic en- ergy.55 Where Lutie Stearns traveled in the state-"urging, cajoling, at times even threatening"56-libraries material- ized like mushrooms (sometimes with as little hope of nourishment). Under the direction of such a vigorous com- mission, and with the financial support of Stout when state aid was not forth- coming, Wisconsin achieved in less than a decade one of the finest library sys- tems in the nation. WISCONSIN INNOVATIONS In addition to her duties as library "instructor," Cornelia often functioned as Hutchins' assistant on various mat- ters. One of Hutchins' greatest contri- butions to the library world was the "book list," which the ALA later took over.57 Aware of the inability of the small libraries to purchase more than a minimum number of books and the in- ability of many of the librarians to choose wisely, Hutchins proposed that books should be evaluated by experts, annotated, and listed in order of their value to limited collections. Cornelia was the author of the first little book liSt.58 The most unique and admired fea- ture of the Wisconsin library system was the Legislative Reference Library, which Cornelia helped establish. In- ?? Ibid., p. 74. " First Biennial Report . . . 1895-96 (see n. 40 above), p. 15. 52 Marvin, "As It Was in the Beginning: Frank Avery Hutchins" (see n. 25 above), p. 189. " Alan E. Kent, "Lutie Stearns, Fiery Librarian, Fought Adage that 'Woman's Place Is in Home,'" unidentified newspaper clipping in C. M. Pierce Papers. 5 Benton H. Wilcox, The Wisconsin Library As- sociation, 1891-1966 (Madison: Wisconsin Library Association, 1966), p. 9. 55 Ibid., p. 8. 58 Kent, "Lutie Stearns" (see n. 53 above). " Kent, "Frank Avery Hutchins" (see n. 49 above), p. 76. 5 Marvin, "As It Was in the Beginning: Frank Avery Hutchins" (see n. 25 above), p. 189.
134 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY spired by developments in New York which aimed at the systematic collec- tion of materials to enable the passage of better legislation,59 Hutchins dreamed of an expanded system for the state of Wisconsin."' He drew up a bill provid- ing for a department of the Library Commission " 1) to make a check list of the public documents of Wisconsin; 2) to prepare catalog cards for such docu- ments, as published, and distribute them to public libraries; 3) to maintain a reference room in the capitol for use of state documents, legislators, and public men; 4) to loan from its work- ing library books of permanent value to students throughout the state."61 Hutch- ins became ill, however, and the job of seeing the measure through the legis- lature fell to Cornelia.62 After the bill passed early in 1901, there arose the question of who should head the depart- ment. Hutchins asked Cornelia, as a reward for her work, to look for some- one when she was on a trip East. At the New York State Library she met Jud- son T. Jennings and settled in her mind that he should be the person. She was surprised to find that Hutchins had, on the recommendation of a faculty mem- ber, decided to try a "wild Irishman" named McCarthy in the position.63 In later years, it was often recounted how Charles McCarthy invented the legislative reference library, and he re- ceived considerable recognition for this. His book of 1912, The Wisconsin Idea, had an introduction by no less a per- sonage than Theodore Roosevelt.64 Hutchins' role was always glossed over, although McCarthy himself did not de- ny his debt to Hutchins.65 Cornelia, at various points during her long life, at- tempted to publicize Hutchins' contri- butions-especially in the legislative reference library affair. She wrote Lutie Stearns in 1921 that "I have been dis- gusted beyond measure, as I have al- ways been for the past fifteen years, at the network of untruth over the found- 5 Kent, "Frank Avery Hutchins" (see n. 49 above), p. 75. 60 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Miss L. M. Curtiss, June 22, 1939, C. M. Pierce Papers. "' Fourth Biennial Report . . . 1901-1902 (see n. 44 above), pp. 18-20. 62 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Miss L. M. Curtiss, June 22, 1939; Cornelia Marvin to Lutie Stearns, June 4, 1921, C. M. Pierce Papers. 3 According to Edward A. Fitzpatrick, McCarthy of Wisconsin (New York: Columbia University Press, 1944), p. 42, McCarthy offered his services to Hutchins because he recognized the legislators' need of assistance and "Hutchins saw in McCar- thy's warm, sacrificing, informed nature, a person- ality of great potentialities." Cornelia contended that McCarthy was recommended either by Ely, as Hutchins told her, or by Commons, which she thought more likely. A later authority states that Frederick Jackson Turner "told Hutchins about one of his graduate students, Charles McCarthy, who had just been granted his Ph.D. Turner did not feel that certain personal peculiarities which McCarthy possessed fitted him for academic life, but urged that Hutchins interview him for the legislative reference post" (Kent, "Frank Avery Hutchins" [see n. 49 above], p. 76). 64 Charles McCarthy, The Wisconsin Idea (New York: Macmillan Co., 1912). 63 Kent, "Frank Avery Hutchins" (see n. 49 above), p. 76. However, the usual account ignored Hutchins' contribution entirely. A typical instance praised the legislative reference library "organized by Charles McCarthy of the department of poli- tics." "McCarthy observed members of the legis- lature, untrained to study and bill drafting, drifting about the library seeking information and aid; he saw the mass of conflicting and undigested legis- lation which went through the mill, and came to the conclusion that legislation has failed, in part at least, because of the absence of any permanent agency for gathering material and the drafting of measures. Most of our state legislatures meet bien- nially. The session lasts for only a few months. Its members are untrained to lawmaking and un- used to legislative methods. To meet this defect and bring together the various departments of the state, McCarthy evolved a bureau to aid the legislature and translate the work of the expert into law. He became its director" (Frederick C. Howe, Wiscon- sin, An Experiment in Democracy [New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1912], pp. 46-47).
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 135 ing of the Wisconsin Legislative Refer- ence Library. The statements have ap- peared in literature so many times that it seems false history is established, and it is almost impossible to get at the truth."66 To another correspondent she complained, "I remember the early days of McCarthy's efforts. I presume you remember them too. He seemed to have no organization ability nor conception of what might be done."67 To Miss Stearns she pointed out "episodes in Mr. Mc- Carthy's career which do not reflect credit upon him from the beginning, for instance, when he threatened to wreck the Library Commission unless he got a large salary increase." "I think the mat- ter ought to be set right, because every person who knows the facts knows that Mr. Hutchins got very little credit for a wonderful service, and that he was the inspiration of whatever is good in many of the things which are credited to Mc- Carthy."68 Cornelia probably felt Hutchins' lack of recognition even more deeply be- cause it was her association with him which provided the foundation for most of her future library work, in both method and orientation. When she went to Oregon from Wisconsin in 1905, she started there the things which she thought were most desirable in the Wis- consin system and developed others along the lines of Hutchins' ideas. The orientation of her work toward a defi- nite plan of political and social reform, her particular concern with the welfare of the farmers, her conception of the duty of higher education to the state, and the role of the expert in public af- fairs are directly related to her years in Wisconsin. THE MOVE TO OREGON In 1905 Cornelia resigned her posi- tion at Wisconsin to become the secre- tary of the Oregon Library Commission. Considering her unpleasant memories of Tacoma and her enjoyment of the vigorous intellectual climate at the Uni- versity of Wisconsin, her move to Ore- gon seems somewhat surprising. In April, 1905, she had received a letter from Mary Frances Isom, librarian of the Portland Library Association. Miss Isom had come to Wisconsin earlier to study their commission as a guide to drawing up the new Oregon law. In her letter, Miss Isom asked Cornelia to rec- ommend a candidate for the Oregon post and described the position as a sort of "traveling secretaryship." "The du- ties are enumerated in the bill and the usual ones and the field is before one and to my thinking most promising- nothing has been done everything is to do . . . The success of the Commission will rest upon her shoulders ... I should like to duplicate Miss Marvin if that were possible-but in addition to other things tact and physical strength must be emphasized."69 Cornelia replied to Miss Isom's let- ' Cornelia Marvin to Lutie Stearns, June 4, 1921, C. M. Pierce Papers. 87 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Miss L. M. Curtiss, June 22, 1939, C. M. Pierce Papers. ' Cornelia Marvin to Lutie Stearns, June 4, 1921, C. M. Pierce Papers. 69 Mary Frances Isom to Cornelia Marvin, April 15, 1905, in the files of the Oregon State Library. According to Bernard Van Horne, "Even before the law was passed Miss Isom, in a series of elabo- rately contrived letters, spun a web into which Cornelia Marvin walked with her eyes wide open and probably amused. Describing the excitement of working in such a fertile if unplanted field, Miss Isom described Miss Marvin in every detail as the person to take the job and, without naming her, asked her to recommend candidates. Her surprise and pleasure when Miss Marvin suggested herself were most touching" (Bernard Van Horne, "Mary Frances Isom: Creative Pioneer In Library Work in the Northwest," in John David Marshall (ed.), An American Library History Reader [Hamden, Conn.: Shoe String Press, 1961], p. 260).
136 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ter by suggesting herself as a candidate -"You probably think me insane to suggest leaving Wisconsin . . . as a li- brary school is about to be established ... and where things are on such a broad scale"-and asking if the secretary would have freedom to work out her own ideas after the Oregon Library Commis- sion had heard an outline and approved policy."0 She gave various reasons for her decision, including the loss of the in- spiring presence of Frank Avery Hutch- ins (by his retirement because of ill health in 1904) and the presence of rel- atives in Oregon, but the real attraction must have been the challenge of the po- sition. In later years she continually emphasized the fortunate role of the pioneer, the "rare opportunity of the founder" whose spirit is built into an institution "indelibly, permanently, and beautifully." In speaking of the first president of the University of Oregon, she quoted a verse which must have had meaning for her also. And yet the road is ours as never theirs' Is not one joy on us alone bestowed For us the Master-Joy, 0 Pioneers- We shall not travel, but we make the road.7' OREGON LIBRARY COMMISSION The Oregon Library Commission, the twentieth such agency to be created in the nation, was established by an act of the legislature of 1905 to give advice to all schools, free, and other pub- lic libraries and to all communities which may propose to establish them, as to the best means of establ shing and maintaining such libraries, the selection of books, cataloging, and other details of library management. It may also pur- chase and operate traveling libraries within the State among communities, libraries, schools, colleges, universities, library associations, study clubs, charitable, and penal institutions, free of cost, except for transportation, under such con- ditions and rules as shall protect the interest of the State and best increase the efficiency of the service it is expected to render the public. It may publish such lists and circulars of infor- mation as it shall deem necessary, and it may also conduct a summer school of library in- struction and a clearing house for periodicals for free gift to local libraries.72 A school-library law of the same year added to the Library Commission's re- sponsibilities the compilation of book lists to be used by school superintend- ents in choosing books and the central- ized purchasing of all such books or- dered. When Cornelia began her work as Secretary of the Oregon Library Com- mission on August 1, 1905, she was given a room in the State House, a desk, some stationery, and an appropriation of $2,000. There were no books and no employees. Outside of Portland there were in Oregon no tax-supported free libraries, no trained librarians, no trav- eling libraries, no school libraries, no organized or cataloged library, and it was impossible to secure in the state any of the supplies necessary for library work. The legislature was known to be tight fisted about educational matters; the clubwomen were the only citizens upon whom she could depend for enthu- siastic support, and they had no vote. The law that created the Oregon Li- brary Commission provided for five non-salaried members-the governor, the state superintendent of public in- struction, the president of the state uni- versity, the librarian of the Portland Library Association, and one member appointed by the governor. The secre- 70 Cornelia Marvin to Mary Frances Isom, April 29, 1905, in the files of the Oregon State Library. 71 Cornelia Marvin, "Prince L. Campbell the Man," speech delivered at the dedication of the site of the Fine Arts Building on the University of Oregon Campus, October 21, 1926, C. M. Pierce Papers. 72 Second Biennial Report of the Oregon Library Commission, 1909 (Salem, Ore., 1909), front cover.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 137 tary of the commission was elected by these members from outside their num- ber. Cornelia was fortunate in the mem- bers of that first board. Mary Frances Isom, the librarian of the progressive Portland Library Association who had worked for the establishment of the commission and had brought Cornelia to Oregon, ably supported all her schemes for state action. Winslow B. Ayer, president of the board of the Portland Library Association, a lum- berman of great influence and wealth, was appointed to the commission by the governor.73 Cornelia recalled him as "the tower of strength for library ef- forts in Oregon, and the financial bene- factor of the early Library Commission days."74 State School Superintendent J. H. Ackerman, a man of strong person- ality and political power, used both these qualities for the library. When the Library Commission was about to be established, he saw the opportunity to connect it with the school libraries and was the author of the Oregon school- library law which made it the duty of the Library Commission to prepare book lists and buy the books.75 Gover- nor George Chamberlain, who Cornelia felt was never greatly interested in the library, was very helpful with legisla- tion "because he interested himself to do the bidding of Mr. Ayer," his good friend.76 President Prince L. Campbell of ihe state university, "an ardent ad- vocate of democracy in education,"77 was much interested in library develop- ment. "He was always willing to co- operate and give recognition to the place and the need of the State Li- brary."78 Cornelia's first job was to survey the state to locate the little subscription li- braries and find people who would be interested in starting free libraries. It was arranged for her to travel with speakers from Ackerman's office, fre- quently into areas which were accessi- ble only by horse-drawn stages. She spoke before farm groups, teachers' meetings, granges, clubs-to anyone who would listen. Most city councils would not consider a tax for books or reading rooms, but there were many groups eager to open the small sub- scription libraries for public use.79 The chance of getting a Carnegie library building prodded some of the councils to a tax levy, but it became quickly ap- parent to Cornelia that many of the small towns could not and should not attempt to establish public libraries. LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT Cornelia's plan for library develop- ment was outlined in her first Biennial Report, in 1907. "Before many years have passed, the thirty-nine cities of Oregon, having a population of from 1,000 to 5,000, and the nine having over 5,000 will surely have public libraries, the experience throughout other States having proved that cities of this size can easily support such lilbraries."80 Cor- 73 Van Horne, op. cit. (see n. 69 above), p. 260. 7 Cornelia Marvin Pierce, manuscript of speech sent to the dedication of the Oregon Library Build- ing, April 3, 1939, C. M. Pierce Papers. 75 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Wilbur D. Rowe July 9, 1938, C. M. Pierce Papers. 71 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Wilbur D. Rowe, July 24, 1937, C. M. Pierce Papers. T Cornelia Marvin Pierce, manuscript of speech sent to the dedication of the Oregon Library Build- ing, April 3, 1939, C. M. Pierce Papers. " Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Wilbur D. Rowe, July 9, 1938, C. M. Pierce Papers. "Pierce, "Oregon Started Reading When State Library Came" (see n. 14 above), p. 6. " First Biennial Report of the Oregon Library Commission, 1907 (Salem, Ore., 1907), p. 9.
138 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nelia decided that traveling libraries were the answer for the 34 cities of 500-1,000, the 70 cities of under 500, and at least 250 rural communities. Her arguments were calculated to appeal to the critical and somewhat hostile legis- lature. The most economical and satisfactory method of giving library opportunities to country peo- ple, and of supplying books for small commu- nities, is to have a State center from which libraries may be sent to these communities and exchanged at frequent intervals for other sec- tions of the State lending library-a library which is always in use and in which there is no waste material and no storing up of books for occasional reference. . . . The central ad- ministration is much more efficient and eco- nomical than local administration could be. Each collection of books is always in use and each station has the benefit of all the books owned by the state.81 This appeal influenced the legislature to increase her appropriation and stimu- lated contributions by several public- spirited citizens. Applications for li- braries poured in from all over the state. The books in these traveling libraries were carefully chosen to appeal to as many readers as possible over the six- month period the library remained in a convenient public place. Each collection of fifty volumes was approximately half fiction and contained some poetry, trav- el, biography, and history, with a few practical books on such subjects as agri- culture, dressmaking, cooking, mechan- ics, and woodworking. Most of the li- braries contained groups of books upon special subjects for the encouragement of "serious" reading and some material on current public questions. It was hoped that the fiction-"interesting wholesome stories which will provide the best sort of recreation and moral in- fluence"82-would attract those who had not yet acquired the "habit" of reading. Once the individual was inter- ested, he could be expected to progress naturally from fiction to biography, on to history, and, finally, into economics and political studies. Cornelia noted with satisfaction that the reading in traveling-library communities would be of a higher quality than that in the ordi- nary city library, where people had a greater number of books to choose from.83 Cornelia, discouraged by the number of requests for more popular books, later confessed that the libraries had apparently been "too heavy." Al- though she recognized the importance of reading as "good wholesome recrea- tion," she regretted the development of the library as a recreational facility rather than an educational institution.84 Cornelia drove the Oregon Library Commission and the state toward the achievement of the goal of "the best books to the greatest number at the least cost."85 At the end of its first year of work, the commission with its mea- ger legislative appropriation, supple- mented by gifts, had supplied forty-five rural communities and small cities in Oregon with traveling libraries, circu- lating about 6,700 volumes. The com- mission had compiled and published a list of books for school libraries and saved the state over $3,000 by acting as the agent for purchasing books for all the school districts-as a side effect raising the quality of the books secured. Cornelia, by liberally interpreting the duties of the commission, had already begun legislative reference work. In the summer of 1906 she conducted a four- 81Ibid., pp. 10-l1. 82 Ibid., p. 12. 83Ibid., p. 11. 84 Johansen, op. cit. (see n. 1 above), pp. 9-10. 8 Cornelia adopted this slogan as the motto of the Oregon State Library.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 139 week summer library school for the few librarians in Oregon.86 Cornelia's budget for the first fifteen months of operation, during which she accomplished an amazing amount for a one-woman agency, totaled $3,103.47. Of this, her salary came to $1,337.40 and traveling expenses, $298.95-the rest of the money going for incidental expenses, supplies, and clerical aid. She complained in her Biennial Report that the appropriation barely covered office expenses, which she considered unjust in view of the fact that the Library Commission had, in one year, saved the state more than it had cost and secured in gifts (which paid for the traveling li- braries) an amount equal to its appro- priation.87 After the legislature responded to Cornelia's plea by raising her appropri- ation to $6,000 on May 24, 1907,88 she was able to expand the services of the commission. With the assistance of var- ious librarians, fieldworkers, and ste- nographers, she embarked on several of the projects for which the Oregon system later became well known. POLITICAL AND SOCIAL ISSUES This was a period in Oregon when political and social issues were being heatedly discussed. It was remarked at this time that the citizens of Oregon "got" political decency much as they got religion, with 75 per cent of the elec- torate voting on the legislative measures that appeared on the ballots. Between 1904 and 1914 no less than 12 amend- ments to the state constitution were adopted by initiative petitions, including woman suf- frage, prohibition, recall by petition and pop- ular vote, home rule for cities, indictment by grand jury, abolition of the death penalty, the reorganization of the judiciary, and changes in the process of amendment itself. An equal number of reforms were embodied in bills that were submitted to the voters and passed. Some of these were measures of hardly less impor- tance than the amendments . . . Measures em- bodying progressive ideas of social and eco- nomic legislation included laws regulating pub- lic utilities and freight rates and prohibiting the issuance of free passes by the railroads, gross earnings taxes on sleeping car and refrig- crator car companies, employers' liability and workmen's compensation laws, and an eight- hour day for public works projects.89 Oregon became "a laboratory of po- litical democracy that attracted notice throughout the nation."90 The voters were confronted with a multitude of is- sues, frequently highly technical and complex, on which they were expected to make intelligent decisions with a background of schooling "dismal and limited" in both towns and rural areas. Except for the solicitations of the vari- ous political factions and the workings of a partisan press, the Library Com- mission was the only source of informa- tion.91 Cornelia did her best to distrib- ute this information to the people so that any gathering was supplied with the material it needed to become a pub- lic forum. The Library Commission de- serves some of the credit for the fact that "in no other state were the plain people so voluble and argumentative on specific questions of public policy."92 In her efforts to provide for the edu- cation of the people of Oregon, Corne- 88 First Biennial Report . . . 1907 (see n. 80 above), p. 9. 87Ibid., p. 23. ' Second Biennial Report . . . 1909 (see n. 72 above), p. 36. 89 Dorothy 0. Johansen and Charles M. Gates, Empire of the Columbia, A History of tke Pacific Northwest (New York: Harper & Bros., 1957), p. 433. 90 Ibid., p. 432. 91 Johansen, op. cit. (see n. 1 above), p. 6. 92 Johansen and Gates, op. cit. (see n. 89 above), p. 434.
140 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY lia's aims usually exceeded her appropri- ations. She felt it her duty to provide all possible services-even if they were not intended by the legislature and the peo- ple of Oregon did not ask for them. Ar- riving fresh from Wisconsin, she was naturally enthusiastic over the develop- ment of legislative reference service. Al- though the Oregon act made no mention of such activity, Cornelia saw to it that the Library Commission provided legis- lative reference service and spent the next several years trying to convince the legislature to finance it. Her efforts failed until 1913, when the Library Commission became the State Library. This change in title itself was a significant step-from a commis- sion which was traditionally intended to promote the establishment of librar- ies on a local level to an agency which was designed to provide actual library service as well. The new law allowed for the loan of books to individuals without other library facilities, as well as the extension of the traveling-library pro- gram. In addition, legislative reference work was to be provided by the state librarian, directed to "collect and index public documents which may be of use to state boards, officials and members of the legislature for the investigation of public questions."93 Cornelia's conception of legislative reference service was much broader than this. Her strong personal interest in the issues under consideration in- creased her enthusiasm for the work. Frequently, she notified legislators of materials which she thought they should consult or sent information which had not been requested. The State Library's files are full of Cornelia's recommenda- tions for "helpful" reading and sugges- tions concerning current legislative af- fairs. She went to a great length to obtain information, writing for advice from agencies and institutions all over the nation so that she could recommend the best plans when she was asked for material. The following letter to a Port- land woman active in many philan- thropic endeavors demonstrates the kind of creative role Cornelia frequent- ly played in legislative matters. Will you please let me have copies of any bills which you intend to present, or give me an idea of exactly what the bill is to be. A good many of the members ask for information on these subjects and I want to be fully informed, and know what is best to give them that will bear upon the Oregon situation. I have just b.en giving Mr. Ackerman material on com- pulsory education law, and in conversation with him the matter of the child labor bill came up. It would seem advisable to combine the two if possible, as to effort and introduc- tion. He has been basing the proposed law on the best laws in existence and I think it would be a good idea for the two of you to come together on this, and probably better for you to g.t this bill of him than for both of you to have bills. I am, as you know, anxious to for- ward all these matters as much as I possibly can, and think it will be best all around if I can have drafts of your bills as soon as pos- sible.94 INNOVATIONS IN SERVICE Cornelia's interest in stimulating dis- cussion of public affairs led her to de- velop "package libraries," a much-ad- mired "tool for implementing adult edu- cation in a democracy."95 Hutchins, as director of the Department of Debating and Public Discussion of the Wisconsin University Extension Division, used "package libraries" as early as 1907 as 9S Abstract of Laws Relating to Libraries in Force in 1915 in the States and Territories of the United States (privately printed, 1916), p. 244. 9 Cornelia Marvin to Millie Trumbull, January 5, 1907, in the files of the Oregon State Library. 9 Martin P. Anderson, "The Loan Package Li- brary: A Tool for Implementing Adult Education in a Democracy," Library Quarterly (April, 1950), 20:119.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 141 a means of distributing study materials throughout the state.96 Cornelia, how- ever, seems to have anticipated Hutch- ins' invention with her "debate li- braries," in use since 1905. Cornelia, who apparently cherished a high regard for the educational value of debating societies, recalled that in 1905 she was horrified to discover the few existing groups in Oregon arguing such questions as "fire vs. water" and "Wash- ington vs. Lincoln."97 In order to sup- ply up-to-date material on stimulating issues, she compiled packages of public documents, speeches, clippings from periodicals and newspapers, and the best books and pamphlets on the sub- ject. The Library Commission had only a limited number of books, and the packages had to be kept small because express rates were high, so Cornelia did not hesitate to chop books into sections or to send out pages from encyclopedias. (Such cavalier treatment of books shocked many librarians, and visitors to the commission always asked to see the "clipped cyclopedias.") In addition to supplying materials, the commission distributed pamphlets on debating, and Cornelia became a member of the exec- utive committee of the newly organized High School Debating League.98 Similar package libraries went to schools for the use of commencement speakers (replacing such topics as "the mill will never turn with the water that has past") and also to granges, women's clubs, study clubs, and various civic or- ganizations. In one two-year period (1909-11), 8,000 pieces of literature were loaned to debating societies in 412 separate shipments.99 Among topics on which the library stimulated discussion were: proportional representation, wom- an suffrage, ballot reform, direct pri- maries, child labor, trade unions, liquor legislation, food adulteration, govern- ment ownership of railroads, spelling reform, and the library movement. The second significant innovation for which Cornelia was responsible, sending books through the state by mail, oc- curred after the Library Commission became the State Library in 1913. The increased book fund made possible the purchase of books to supplement the traveling libraries and to answer the re- quests of the small public libraries for specific materials. Cornelia did her best to create a system capable of supplying individual rural patrons with books and other material, equal to what would be put before them in a large public li- brary.100 Before 1912, books had to be sent by express, but then Senator Jona- than Bourne of Oregon (encouraged, even nagged, by Cornelia) saw through Congress the parcel-post law he had written.'0' Somewhat later, Oregon Sen- 96Ibid., pp. 119-20. "Pierce, "Oregon Started Reading When State Library Came" (see n. 14 above), p. 6. " Second Biennial Report . . . 1909, p. 15. 9 Third Biennial Report of the Oregon Library Commission, 1911 (Salem, Ore., 1911), p. 15. "1 "The Oregon system is now found in many states, and it is believed to have been the first mail order free library. The traveling library system has been widely used for many years, but Oregon first began mailing out books to all who asked for them, and it is still the only library which lends all the kinds of material a student would get from a visit to a good reference room-books, periodicals, peri- odical articles, pages, articles and sections from cyclopedias and valuable reference books-every- thing is entrusted to the mails and to the borrower, whoever and wherever he may be, except that no loans are made directly to any person who may borrow through a local public library. The public libraries of the state daily forward to the State Li- brary those requests they can not fill" (Biennial Report of the Oregon State Library, 1923 [Salem, Ore., 1923], p. 6). 101 Early Pomeroy, "Bourne, Jonathan," in Dic- tionary of American Biography (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1958), Vol. 22, Suppl. 2, p. 55.
142 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ator Fred Steiwer was instrumental in the addition of a special library post.102 Cornelia's mail-order business thrived (the books being free except for the postage which was paid by the reader), and she was able to boast in 1917 that "the Oregon Library system offers a much freer use of books and more near- ly approaches the idea of full library privileges for all, than does any other state system."'103 Mail-order service was complicated by the fact that the patron could not see the books to make a selection and the librarian had only a letter to guide her in filling the request. One of Cornelia's assistants recalled that "under Miss Marvin's direction one learned to look at the postmark, to note if it were a man or woman, to look for some evidence that might suggest age, reading capac- ity."''04 Cornelia demanded that the mail-order reference librarian be in- formed as to the relative values of books on any subject, have sufficient imagination to read between the lines of a vague request, and have sympathy and eagerness to be of service at any personal cost of thought or effort.'05 Every person employed in the loan de- partment had to be able to use indexes, bibliographies, reference books, and state and federal documents and was encouraged to specialize in some partic- ular kind of literature-agriculture, technical books, economics, or political science. The requests arrived in such volume that mail during peak periods had to be piled outside the door to the cramped quarters in the Supreme Court Build- ing, where the library had moved in 1914. Letters were always answered promptly, the same day if possible. One hundred fifty to two hundred requests would arrive in the morning and be filled by afternoon.'06 Assistants would pile the books and materials on a long counter, with the written request on top, then call Cornelia to approve their selections. (One assistant recalled that this was when the "fireworks" began.)107 Every letter, no matter how vague or frivolous, was answered by something, and each package included a brochure or reading list calculated to capture a new reader.'08 The books were charged by a double-entry system, weighed, and wrapped; then postage was calculated and recorded and a notice of shipment mailed. After the packages were sent to the post office, the transactions were written in the daily shipping book and the letters filed. During the month of January, 1916, there were 646 mail- order requests and 555 shipments-ac- complished by the full-time service of four people.'09 The requests for material often con- tained glimpses of local conditions and expressions of gratitude (some writers, who came to feel they knew Cornelia, wrote to her about their hopes, their families, and their personal crises)."*1 Cornelia cherished testimonials to the value of the library lending service and devoted a large portion of her biennial 102 Cornelia Marvin Pierce, manuscript of speech sent to the dedication of the Oregon Library Build- ing, April 3, 1939. 10S Biennial Report of the Oregon State Library, 1917 (Salem, Ore., 1917), pp. 4-5. 10 Johansen, op. cit. (see n. 1 above), p. 8. " Biennial Report . . . 1923 (see n. 100 above), p. 7. 106 Ibid., p. 1; on one day in January, 1922, the library sent out 1,477 volumes in answer to requests (ibid., p. 10). ' Johansen, op. cit. (see n. 1 above), p. 9. 108 Ibid. 109 Biennial Report . . . 1917 (see n. 103 above), p. 4. 110 Johansen, op. cit. (see n. 1 above), p. 9.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 143 reports to those most likely to open the heart and loosen the fist of the legis- lature. The 1921 Biennial Report of forty-eight pages contained a twenty- page section of excerpts from letters titled "On the Witness Stand" so the borrowers would "testify" in favor of increased library support. Cornelia could not resist including some of the humorous requests which must have brightened entire days-such as the "500" player who wanted to know when to play the joker, the high school girl who had to write a commencement ora- tion on "if" and wanted material, and a request from a debater for "any dark, shady thing" in the private life of Abra- ham Lincoln. One writer wanted to know "who was the original of Mary in the poem 'Mary had a little lamb' and also the state in which she lived." An- other inquired whether any of the dis- ciples of Christ was a master mason. Requests appeared for material on de- bate topics such as "Resolved: that the works of man are more pleasing to the eye than the works of nature" and "Re- solved: that we live on the inside of the earth instead of the outside." Among the books requested were "a missionary love story," "'Bookerty' Washington's 'Up from Slavery"' and "President Wilson's book 'The knew Freedom.' ""' According to Cornelia's calculations in 1919, Oregon made a larger number of shipments from its general-loan desk than any other state which had insti- tuted such a service (with the possible exception of New York, where no sepa- rate statistics for mail-order loans were kept). She was pleased to note that in the period of January and February, 1916, when the Michigan State Library recorded 198 packages and 881 volumes sent out in answer to requests, the Ore- gon State Library had mailed 1,182 packages and 4,155 volumes.12 Even considering that the states in the Mid- dle West should have been able to pro- vide more adequate local service, the Oregon State Library's circulation sta- tistics were impressive. Contrary to ex- pectation, the development of city and county libraries seemed to increase the use of the State Library loan service. Cornelia explained this phenomenon by noting that the local centers taught the people about libraries and the possibili- ties of securing the books they needed, while the increasing number of eager li- brarians forwarded to the State Library the requests they could not fill.1"3 Cornelia was proud that the contents of the State Library were so largely de- termined by the needs of the people. A portion of the book fund was reserved to purchase specific books requested by individuals (1,636 such purchases in 1915),1"4 and when necessary the State Library would request material from another library in the state-the Uni- versity of Oregon, the Agricultural Col- lege, or the Portland Public Library. Cornelia tried to develop specialized collections to meet the needs of special- interest groups-from large numbers of technical, agricultural, and business books to small collections of books on music and musical scores for the use of local music teachers and musicians. In 1919 there was a sudden growth of re- quests for books on trapping wild ani- mals and preparing the pelts-Cornelia ' Biennial Report of the Oregon State Library, 1921 (Salem, Ore., 192 1); Biennial Report ... 1923 (see n. 100 above). 112 Biennial Report . . . 1917 (see n. 103 above), p. 5. 113 Biennial Report . . . 1923 (see n. 100 above), pp. 19-20. 114 Biennial Report of the Oregon State Library, 1915 (Salem, Ore., 1915), p. 8.
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY observed that "all rural Oregon [was] seemingly bent on getting fur by trap- ping or fur farming, and that section of the Library has grown to answer the requests."115 When "the whole popula- tion" took to amateur theatricals, the library had to buy "every available play" recommended for children and high schools or for community produc- tion."16 Cornelia's view of the library as an institution of higher education open to all citizens irrespective of income or lo- cation placed a great emphasis on se- lecting the proper books and guiding the reader to those that served his needs. The library was naturally re- sponsible for the selection of the books which were made available to the peo- ple of the state-primarily a matter of using limited funds for those books most suited to the needs of the majority of the readers. However, Cornelia felt an almost personal responsibility for every book read by every citizen of Oregon. She encouraged individuals to write to the library for lists of the best books on special subjects and of good editions. These lists were intended to function as a guidance service to help in- dividuals purchase the best books for their money, not as part of a statewide censorship program. When asked for a copy of the library's "blacklist" Corne- lia replied, "We never published such a list. We think it very much better to publish and distribute lists of the very best books and to let the others go by default.'""l7 Under Cornelia's direction the State Library engaged in a vigorous campaign to improve children's reading material in Oregon. Surveys taken during the past year of the reading of boys in the State Industrial School and in a dozen village and rural schools have proved conclusively that a large percentage of the chldren who are reading without the direction of librarians are reading books which are really destructive as to character building. Well-meaning parents are often the offenders when they buy without knowledge or investi- gation of contents, the books for sale at local stores . . . Remember that bad books make criminals, wrecks, and useless men and women. Cast out every book which is not wholly true and fine. We want no false accounts of life, untrue histories, nor inaccurate science for children.118 Book dealers were urged to direct pur- chasers to the better books, and lists of books suitable for Christmas gifts were distributed. Cornelia saw that talks or exhibits on children's books were made at Chautauqua assemblies, the State Federation of Women's Clubs meetings, and state fairs. Boys who requested "blood and thunder" books from the li- brary were sent lists of books approved by Boy Scout leaders, and their parents were mailed a warning pamphlet, Blow- ing Out the Boy's Brains.119 VIEW OF LIBRARY WORK This broad conception of library service demanded that a librarian be much more than a custodian of books and a provider of requested informa- tion. In order to "sell" books to the public and to create an enthusiasm for reading, the librarian had to be the kind of "person who really uses books her- self, otherwise she is sort of a cheap faker."'20 In addition, she should be 115 Biennial Report of the Oregon State Library, 1919 (Salem, Ore., 1919), p. 6. 116 Ibid., p. 8. 117 Cornelia Marvin to Laura Beckworth, April 18, 1917, in the files of the Oregon State Library. 118 Cornelia Marvin, "The Use of Books," un- dated manuscript, C. M. Pierce Papers. 119 Biennial Report . . . 1919 (see n. 115 above), p. 12. 120 Cornelia Marvin to Winslow B. Ayer, Novem- ber 30, 1920, C. M. Pierce Papers.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 145 proficient in the various technical ac- tivities in order to devote a larger por- tion of her time to the important duties of selecting books and guiding readers. As far as Oregon librarians were con- cerned, Cornelia automatically expect- ed that they would be among the most progressive members of their commu- nity and willing to assume a position of leadership on various issues. In 1912, for example, she sent a letter to all Ore- gon librarians requesting them to ob- tain signatures for an initiative petition for a bill to abolish capital punishment. "I have been personally interested in this step in the civilization of Oregon and feel that all the librarians are equally interested . .. I am hoping that each Oregon librarian may return the petition with at least one hundred names on it."'' In her own library she selected intel- ligent, well-trained young women, with interest in public affairs and a back- ground in economics and political sci- ence. She always preferred women to men in the profession. "I do not believe in making a sex-question, but I do be- lieve that the library women are gener- ally very much more competent and in- telligent and instructive than the library men . . . women have generally made our profession."'122 Unfortunately, there were relatively few librarians who met these specifica- tions and who were willing to devote themselves to tiny salaries and limited horizons in the small public libraries. The scarcity of such people to staff these libraries was one of the major factors which turned Cornelia against such institutions. "In Wisconsin, all our field work for many years, I thought, was a failure, because we were trying to educate and stimulate a constantly moving procession of inferior librarians in little towns."123 Cornelia, who had never believed in the motto, "Not the few great libraries, but the many small ones," advocated that the small library unit be abolished entirely. As she wrote the editor of Public Libraries in 1913, I am quite convinced that the library in the village or small town is a very unsatisfactory institution which gives, ordinarily, very poor results for the money invested . . . When I suggested at the Library Commission meeting two years ago that I thought it unwise to en- courage the establishment of small libraries, I was pounced on by all the library enthusiasts. It is our settled policy in Oregon . . . to en- courage the establishment of central county libraries which will reach all of the small towns with branches and stations, giving efficient service and a good book supply through this wider cooperation . . . I am inclined to think that, with all our talk about what public li- braries can do and what they mean, is not much to the purpose unless they are admin- istered by competent people and have splendid collections of books.124 The small library, as she described it, "has poor service, few books, requires a large rate of tax levy and accumulates a dead stock which duplicates the dead stock on the shelves of all the neighbor- ing towns."125 Oregon was one of the first states to provide for county support of library service, and after several legislative at- tempts Cornelia felt that they had in 1919 achieved a "model" law. Iron- ically, although Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Oregon pioneered in the county- library field (between 1900 and 1910), 121 Cornelia Marvin to "Oregon Librarians," May, 1912, C. M. Pierce Papers. "22 Cornelia Marvin to Beatrice Winser, April 2, 1920, C. M. Pierce Papers. 123 Cornelia Marvin to C. C. Williamson, April 2, 1920, C. M. Pierce Papers. 124 Cornelia Marvin to M. E. Ahern, May 8, 1913, C. M. Pierce Papers. 125 Biennial Report . . . 1921 (see n. 111 above), p. 14.
146 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the outstanding county systems were developed in the next two decades in California, Louisiana, New Jersey, Ohio, and North Carolina.126 Despite Cornelia's herculean efforts, county li- braries never fully developed in Oregon. In later years, Cornelia decided that even counties were not large enough to employ trained and experienced librar- ians while maintaining a large, up-to- date collection, and she became by the mid-thirties an advocate of regional li- braries.'27 An interesting explanation of why county libraries failed to develop in several states was advanced by a visit- ing British librarian in 1927. After ob- serving library systems in a number of states, he concluded that "undoubtedly the apparent slow progress with the or- ganization of County Libraries in America is due in some measure to the success of the traveling library move- ment." He pointed out that California, where county systems had been so suc- cessful, had ceased to supply commu- nities with books from the State Library, finding for propaganda purposes a dis- contented community more valuable than a contented one. If this argument is valid, then Cornelia's constant ex- tension of state library service in traveling libraries and mail-order loans actually prevented the development of the county systems-the reading public of the state was too well satisfied to agitate for county service.'28 PACIFIC NORTHWEST LIBRARY ASSOCIATION Cornelia had relatively little to do with library work on a national level, other than sending a steady stream of suggestions to the ALA. As she wrote to George B. Utley in 1919 concerning her election as second vice-president of the ALA, "I am really interested in the ALA although I never go near it, but the country is wide, time is short, and travel expenses are great."'129 She was far more concerned with the activities of the Pacific Northwest Li- brary Association (PNLA), which she and Mary Frances Isom had helped establish in 1909. Miss Isom went so far as to declare in 1911, You know I am still a Philistine as regards the A.L.A. I think it is pleasant to go and mect the people but so far as the association being of any value I fail to see it. I feel the same way about A.L.A. headquarters. I think it is money sunk in the bottom of a well. I have never asked a question yet that has been in- telligently answered. Perhaps they do some sort of work but I fail to see that too, and I think a small association that is alive is more important for our people than the larger one. I firmly believe that every living library mortal in Oregon must belong to PNLA. I burn with missionary zeal.130 The PNLA was born in June, 1909, at a three-day conference held on the University of Washington campus in Seattle. Thirty-four librarians from Oregon and Washington and one from British Columbia wrote a constitution inviting "any person or organization in- terested in library work in British Co- lumbia, Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, and Utah" to join the or- 126 Robert Ellis Lee, Continuing Education for Adults through the American Public Library, 1822- 1964 (Chicago: American Library Association, 1966), pp. 32-33. 127 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Henry D. Sheldon, August 25, 1938, C. M. Pierce Papers. 128 Captain R. Wright, "State Libraries and Li- brary Commissions of America," Some Impressions of the Public Library System of the United States of America (Edinburgh: Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, 1927), p. 73. 129 Cornelia Marvin to George B. Utley, May 10, 1919, C. M. Pierce Papers. 1?0 Mary Frances Isom, as quoted by Van Horne, op. cit. (see n. 69 above), p. 262.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 147 ganization.131 It grew rapidly; the first membership list of 85 swelled to 205 in 1910, with a record number of one hundred librarians actually attending the 1915 meeting. Mary Frances Isom was president in 1911, and Cornelia became the second woman president in 1917. A historian of the PNLA, com- menting on Cornelia as "one of the most remarkable of a number of notable early Northwest Librarians" and pos- sessed of "considerable vision and drive," describes the two-day meeting in 1917 as "an exhausting marathon, judging by its accomplishments."'132 "President Marvin read an Executive Board report outlining an ambitious program of PNLA activities including creation of an Extension Committee to enlarge membership, a continuing Sub- scription Book Committee, a Commit- tee on Libraries for Alaska, a School Library Committee, a Pacific North- west Bibliography Committee, and a Trustees Committee on public library finance. She favored a 1918 meeting in Seattle, and a 1919 meeting in British Columbia with the Library Association of California. She also advocated print- ing and distributing the conference pro- gram one month before each meet- ing.' 133 The PNLA, which had voted in 1915 to affiliate with the ALA, twice saw the national organization take over activi- ties pioneered by the regional group. The PNLA publicity committee estab- lished in 1914 was directed to "secure for its members the advantages of the work being done in all the libraries of this section and to arrange for the sale of such posters and printed material as may be used by libraries generally"- meanwhile urging the ALA to establish a central publicity bureau. The ALA finally did so in 19 19.134 The PNLA also preceded the ALA in the matter of subscription books. Cornelia, who as PNLA president out- lined the duties of the Subscription Books Committee in 1917, had long been outraged by the activities of the many unscrupulous subscription book dealers. As she wrote in 1919, Subscription books are the greatest deterrent to proper home libraries. With the proper use of the money annually wasted in unreliable reference books and undesirable "sets" of un- read books, and the ubiquitous "five feet" of classics we might have a wonderful and effec- tive library system in Oregon . . . Libraries are not guiltless in this matter either, and many of them without a reputable late book on any scientific or technical subject, without a good book for mothers about the care of children, utterly lacking in books about the subjects which are engrossing the attention of the world, will spend their book funds for the most worthless, inaccurate and extravagantly made subscription books, accepting the glib assurances of the agent with childlike con- fidence.135 Through mimeographed bulletins dis- tributed to the librarians of the region by the state libraries of Oregon and Washington, and others, the Subscrip- tion Books Committee reported on the contents and value of such books being sold in the region. When the demand for such information increased, the com- mittee established a printed series avail- able to librarians outside the North- west. Finally, with the number of non- regional demands exceeding those of the area, the ALA was requested to adopt the project. After some delay, 131 Ruth Hale Gershevsky, PNLA 1909-1959, A Chronological Summary of Fifty Eventful Years (Pacific Northwest Library Association, 1959), p. 7. 132 Ibid., p. 10. 133 Ibid., p. 11. 134 Ibid., p. 13. `3 Biennial Report . .. 1919 (see n. 115 above), pp. 12-13.
148 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ALA headquarters established The Sub- scription Books Bulletin in 1930.136 LIBRARY WAR SERVICE Cornelia and the PNLA participated in one of the most remarkable periods in the history of library activity in this country-the World War I Library War Service. In those days before Hollywood movies and USO entertain- ers followed hot on the heels of the troops, reading was one of the few forms of recreation open to thousands of men in training camps, trenches, and hospitals. The men sent overseas, most of whom spoke no foreign languages, had difficulty finding any reading ma- terial printed in English and were par- ticularly starved for news from home. (One Red Cross nurse in France told of a young hospital patient who had subsisted for six weeks on a leaf from the advertising section of a popular magazine-he had memorized, among other things, the number of times each letter of the alphabet appeared on the page) *137 On the entrance of the United States into the war, the ALA began organizing the Library War Service program. Cam- paigns for money and books brought contributions pouring in, and the Car- negie Corporation made a grant of $10,000 for each of the proposed thirty- two training-camp libraries.'38 More than seven hundred librarians partic- ipated in the Library War Service pro- gram for periods varying from several months to two or three years. "By the end of 1919, $6,000,000 had been ex- pended on books and library service, and 7,000,000 volumes had been placed in Library War Service Libraries or distributed directly to Army and Navy personnel."'39 The librarians of the Pacific North- west were extremely active in the war service, a topic of considerable interest at PNLA meetings. A few went to war (like Miss Isom, who spent several months in France setting up hospital libraries), and those who stayed be- hind found much to do in setting up camp libraries and helping the populace adjust to the rigors of a wartime econ- omy. Herbert Hoover, head of the Food Administration, appealed to libraries to publicize the efforts to conserve food- stuffs for shipment abroad. The librar- ies responded enthusiastically, as an excerpt from Public Libraries indicates: "For the Arn-erican public library this is the moment of a life-time. We have no longer to devise alluring ways of mak- ing our wares attractive. There is some- thing which every American 'wants to know' and wants vitally to know. All we have to do is to tell him that in our library he can find the answer . . . one of the things housewives and mothers want vitally to know is how to Hoover- ize intelligently; how to present to their families such palatable, nutritious and interesting 'substitutes' that meatless Tuesdays and wheatless Wednesdays shall be days of joy and not of gloom."140 Cornelia, as library publicity director for Oregon, responded with her usual zeal. As an editorial in Public Libraries declared, "If Oregon doesn't show up at the head of the list in food conser- vation it won't be because the State 136 Gershevsky, op. cit. (see n. 131 above), p. 15. 1S7 Theodore Wesley Koch, Books in the War, the Romance of Library War Service (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1919), p. 168. 13 Ibid., p. 6. "' Lee, op. cit. (see n. 126 above), p. 43. 140 Marilla Waite Freeman, "War and the Li- baries," Public Libraries (May, 1918), 23:217.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 149 Library has not done its part in the movement." The letters from Miss Marvin to the libraries of the state with that characteristic buoyancy for which she is noted, pump enthusiasm into every line of her publicity material. These consist of heart-to-heart talks with the librar- ies, news items of what the libraries in Oregon and other places are doing, appeals for certain material or for certain classes of work, com- m-nts on certain books, pointing out valuable Government and state publications, directions for holding exhibits, opinions on recipes and posters, directions for interesting schools, etc., etc., always with the personal touch between the director and the librarians plainly in evi- dence.14 1 In one of her reports Cornelia re- lated how, in her visits over the state, she found the libraries had done every- thing possible-but the people con- tinued to resist reading the material. "My conclusion was that if these were really to be used it would be necessary for the librarian to peddle them about, to take a basket on her arm and to get a pushcart, just to go around and call upon people and say 'Good morning. Have you a food book in the house? If not, let me know what children you have and how many members of your family there are, and whether you are keeping food pledges and what difficul- ties you meet and I will leave a certain book to be read.' etc."'42 She was dis- turbed to note that there were a great many people on the fringe of the towns who were not interested in any com- munity effort. The librarians, she thought, might reach them through their children. Her idea, anticipating a modern advertising technique, was to encourage the children to ask their mothers embarrassing questions-how many calories they had had a certain day or the food value of certain foods- which would eventually drive the wom- en to the library in self-defense. There is no information on how well this suc- ceeded. Cornelia was directly involved in the Library War Service program as a vol- unteer in charge of the ALA War Li- brary Service for troops on the Mexican border. These troops, scattered in small groups over the length of the border, had not been taken care of in the first ef- forts directed at the huge training camps. The men were reported to be actually reading dictionaries, and a traveling-library system was set up to supply books. The El Paso district, in which Cornelia served, extended from Yuma, Arizona, to the Big Bend coun- try in Texas. She stayed from Septem- ber 1 to November 12, 1918, which in- cluded her vacation, two weeks allowed as leave by the library, and two weeks without salary.'43 EUROPE Probably one reason Cornelia did not participate more in national library affairs was that when able to escape from her duties in Oregon she preferred to take extended leaves of absence (without pay) for vacation trips- Europe, November 1, 1909-Novem- ber 1, 1910, and the Orient for a few months in 1919. Her letters from Eu- rope were usually full of detailed obser- vations and pungent comment. For example, as a confirmed Protestant, she found difficulty in understanding the role religion played in Catholic nations and finally concluded somewhat flip- pantly, "I have solved the problem of 1'4 "A Live Institution," Public Libraries (April, 1918), 23:169. 142 Cornelia Marvin, mimeographed sheet titled "Library Publicity Director, Second Report," C. M. Pierce Papers. " Biennial Report ... 1919 (see n. 115 above), p. 17.
150 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY rich and poor in the Catholic church- the rich go to offer superstitious thanks for the present blessings, and the poor are equally devout hoping for better things in the future."'44 She delighted in the works of Michelangelo but com- plained that "he needed to have fewer plans or more persistence for Florence is full of his unfinished things.'45 Paris, as always, was creating new styles in feminine apparel, and Cornelia decided that the latest fashion in dress was "rather vulgar": . . . with the broad tight band around the bottom of the skirt for 12-14 inches and the top gathered into it, makes the women walk like boys running a sack race at a county fair. In fleeing from cabs on busy streets, or in getting into busses they must lift the whole thing to the thighs or fall headlong. The views are astonishing-high heels, tight skirt, and a black and white satin scarf make the Pari- sienne. The only solution I can suggest for her navigation is wheels or roller skates, for these women always hang to the arms of men and they could be shoved or pulled very well.146 Appalled by the conditions in the slums of the English and Scottish cities, she mused: "Seeing the filthy, diseased people in these cities has made my ... mind boggle in regard to the justice of spending public funds for Mary J. Holmes when people are starving for food. But then, minds must be refreshed and inspired, or all bodies will be worth no more than animals, so if we keep standards as high as possible, we de- serve the support we get, and more."'147 FINANCIAL PROBLEMS Having to struggle with an extremely limited budget and being compelled to live in Salem, "which offers absolutely nothing outside of the daily office rou- tine,"'148 were the two things which most annoyed Cornelia about her job. In 1910 in response to a letter from H. W. Wilson, apparently offering her the edi- torship of a new book list, she regretted that she was committed to the Oregon Library Commission until the next year. The commission was asking for a much larger appropriation. "If we do not get it, I shall stay no longer than necessary on the Commission's account, as it is impossible with our present appropria- tion to do the work which we should do, and there is not enough office help to relieve the secretary of the burden of the unimportant detail work, which might be done by any fairly good as- sistant."'149 Apparently conditions im- proved somewhat, because she informed Wilson a few months later: "I have decided that I shall not make any change just at present, and that when I do make a change I shall surely want to go on a farm, rather than in another library."150 All during her years in Oregon, Cor- nelia was able to describe the needs of the library concisely-money and space. The problem with space was annoying, the quarters in the Supreme Court Building not being designed for library purposes and being too small to allow the activity of the library to proceed efficiently. The financial situation, how- ever, was critical. The constant battle for increased appropriation, which Cor- '" Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Florence, February 11, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. " Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Florence, February 14, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. ' Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Paris, July 3, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. "1 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Keswick, England, August 19, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. 148 Cornelia Marvin to H. W. Wilson, December 9, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. 149 Ibid. 150 Cornelia Marvin to H. W. Wilson, May 4, 1911, C. M. Pierce Papers.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 151 nelia dreaded, usually brought an in- crease of several thousand dollars less than requested. Reminding the legisla- ture that the library "can give just as much service to the people of Oregon as the Legislature is willing to allow it to give," Cornelia complained that the 1917 appropriation of $20,000 a year, in response to her budget calling for $25,000, necessitated considerable cur- tailment of work. It was ... necessary practically to discontinue field work with public libraries, adequate serv- ice to institution libraries, inventory, publica- tion of book lists for our borrowers, compila- tion and publication library aids and indexes for schools, printed lists for traveling library patrons, statistics of classified loans, county orders, and traveling library use, overdue and renewal notices to borrowers and adequate legislative reference work . . . With an in- creased use of the library of over 30,000 in the past two years, and with a total shipment of volumes for the biennium 70,871 in excess of those shipped during 1913-14 (the number for 1917-18 is nearly 7,000 more than double the number of volumes shipped in 1913-14) we have practically the same appropriation and the number of regular employees is not in- creased.15' According to Cornelia, the State Li- brary was then receiving a smaller an- nual appropriation than the libraries of Cedar Rapids and Davenport, Iowa, and two-fifths as much as that of Day- ton, Ohio.152 By 1925, Cornelia was repeating the same message in a more urgent vein: "The appropriation is inadequate; it has always been inadequate; the Legis- lature must study this public problem and offer a solution through adequate support, or by public statement that Oregon cannot afford a sufficient supply of good books for its people, and the Legislature must determine which peo- ple shall be cut off from library privi- leges and just how it is to be done."'153 The State Library was by that time re- ceiving only one-tenth the amount Multnomah County (Portland) spent in serving about the same number of people-the State Library with $3 7,500 and Multnomah County with $3 77,396 in 1923. When asked to write a short bio- graphical account, Cornelia described her profession and her hobbies. My work has been library work. I take the greatest pride in the fact that I am librarian of the Oregon State Library-the greatest privilege a woman could have is to give good books to people who are hungry for them, and I regret my shortcomings in this connection more than any other . . . The only thing I have ever done to make the world a better place to live is to promote libraries. There is no greater or better task to which any person could devote a life, though there are many which offer fewer handicaps, especially in the matter of going to legislatures to secure ap- propriations to run libraries. The money comes very hard.154 Cornelia had some reason to be proud of her work. By 1928 there were eighty- two free public libraries in Oregon, where there had been virtually none in 1905. There were 706 traveling-library stations and 29,816 mail-order patrons. In the last biennial period there were 48,782 shipments containing 276,855 volumes, an increase of 9,143 ship- ments and 39,798 volumes over the pre- vious biennium.'55 A description of the Oregon State Library by a British li- .'. Biennial Report . . . 1919 (see n. 115 above), pp. 8-9. 152 Ibid. 153 Oregon State Library Biennial Report, 1925 (Salem, Ore., 1925), P. 3. 154 Cornelia Marvin to Fred Lockley, January 25, 1921, C. M. Pierce Papers. 1' The Oregon State Library and Its Book Serv- ice to the People of Oregon, Being the Eleventh Biennial Report, October 1, 1926, to September 30, 1928, and Resignation Message to Its Patrons of the State Librarian (Salem, Ore., 1928), p. 4.
152 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY brarian, appearing in a 1928 publication of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, called the library "extremely interest- ing." The Oregon State Library . . . has unique features: the librarian is not afraid to experi- ment . . . A notable feature of the service is its publicity work; the bulletins and book lists of important public libraries . . . are procured in bulk and issued to centres and individual students. These are broadcast as general publicity work in parcels and boxes of books, and are used specifically to meet the needs of groups and individuals. I noted also a bold and original method of supplying in- formation by sending out sections of large and expensive reference works and encyclopedias ... the scheme appears to work very well . . . The State librarian, in spite of her many activities, gives very individual and personal supervision to the fulfilment of requests which are in large measure for "a book about" a subject. A strong personal interest, combined with expert knowledge, gives a very valuable service to those who are far removed from the amenities available in cities, and Oregon is fortunate in possessing a service of out- standing merit.156 Although reasonably satisfied with her career, Cornelia apparently never became reconciled to being an old maid. Writing from Florence in 1910, she observed: "Hutton says Venice is the city of German brides and Florence of English spinsters, that there are more old maids drinking tea in Florence at five each day than in any other place on earth. He is right. It is full of them, with a lot of widows, all grey, dumpy, red-nosed, near-sighted, and with other charms. XVhen I realize that I am one of them, it makes me quite unhappy."'157 In addition to other disturbing char- acter traits, the English persisted in being "so crude in this 'Miss' business." "On the continent I quite forgot that I was an 'old maid' for the nice Italians always say 'Signora' and the French 'Madam' and that was a compliment for I'm too old and grey and fat to be flat- tered by Mademoiselle. But, somehow, these English seem to know that all traveling Americans are unattached, and they bawl out 'Yes, Miss' in a derisive way very unbecoming in such a land of spinsters as England."'58 When Walter Pierce, former governor of Oregon, began to court her in 1928, she was reportedly as pleased and ex- cited as the proverbial schoolgirl. When Cornelia resigned from the State Library in December, 1928, the financial situation was critical. She was quoted as saying, "I made up my mind last time . . . that I would never go through another session. Good men and women are pilloried before the ways and means committee."159 Under head- lines such as STATE LIBRARIAN QUITS DUE TO HANDICAPS IMPOSED BY LEGISLATURE VETERAN IN SERVICE RESENTS BEING "PILLORIED BEFORE COMMITTEE" the newspapers carried Cornelia's com- plaints of opposition by various polit- ical cliques and bitter charges that the budget makers placed greater emphasis on facilities for the care of the mentally defective than for the enlightenment of the intelligent but poor. She was quoted as suggesting that even "rather than allow the library to be victimized by political manipulation constantly it would be better to allow it 'a suitable "'1 K. E. Overbury, "Notes on Libraries in the United States of America," Further Impressions of the Public Library System of the United States of America (Edinburgh: Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, 1928), pp. 25-26. 15,. Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Florence, February 19, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. 15 Cornelia Marvin to Mabel Marvin, Septem- ber 4, 1910, C. M. Pierce Papers. '5 Statesman (Salem, Ore.), December 19, 1928.
CORNELIA MARVIN PIERCE 153 guarantee of reasonable support as an independent organization in suitable quarters' or as an alternative have it transferred to Oregon State College, or the University of Oregon, and merged with one of their libraries 'which has some chance of being adequately housed and supported.' "160 In view of the considerable furor that she caused at the time of her resigna- tion, it is interesting to note that ten years later (after reading an account of her resignation) Cornelia protested: "I was surprised at the quotation of my remark about never going before anoth- er legislature for money for the State Library. I presume I said that every year for twenty years. It was always a very unpleasant experience, but the re- sults were fairly satisfactory so I think I would have continued."''6' Apparently, Cornelia's resignation was simply the result of her decision to marry Pierce. She took the opportunity to give vent to the pent-up irritation of twenty-four years of public service in the hope that her criticism might have some beneficial effect. As she wrote to a friend, I hope I have not antagonized the legislature too much with my report. Possibly they will not read it, but at any rate, I was obliged to speak the truth, and thought I did it in a very gentle manner. If I had spoken the whole truth, I can see that it might have been offen- sive, but it seems to me it is time for somebody employed by the state to protest against some things that happen, and I thought that I could bear some of the odium of making them public that those who remain might have a little help along the way.162 The amount of "odium" which Cor- nelia incurred was slight. The publicity her resignation received and the trib- utes paid her on a statewide basis prob- ably made her even more a leading fig- ure in the state than she had been pre- viously. Miss Marvin has been an enlightening influ- ence in Oregon, for as Carlyle said "the true university of these days is a collection of books," and she has made such a university accessible to everyone, no matter how iso- lated. If "blessings rest upon Cadmus, the Phoenicians or whoever invented books" sim- ilar blessings rest upon those who made books available to all-and in this regard Cornelia Marvin leads all the rest. She is indeed, Ore- gon's foremost woman, but like the prophet who is not without honor save in his own country, she is not without honor-save in the state-house.'63 Following her retirement, Cornelia continued to play a leading role in Ore- gon educational and political affairs. As a member of the Board of Higher Edu- cation she helped design a plan for the unification of the institutions of higher education, particularly the libraries. She very nearly became a Republican candidate for Congress in 1932 but then decided to support her husband's cam- paign for the same position. Together they stumped the district, finding many eager supporters in the friends from her library days. Walter was elected, and Cornelia became his secretary, re- searcher, and speech writer. She be- came, virtually, a second representative -as Walter reminded his constituents, they had two for the price of one. They spent ten years in Washington, engaged in the legislative battles of the New Deal. Returning to Oregon in 1942, they maintained an interest in public affairs until their deaths-Walter in 1954 and Cornelia in 1957. ' Salem Journal (Ore.), December 29, 1928. 161 Cornelia Marvin Pierce to Wilbur D. Rowe, October 28, 1938, C. M. Pierce Papers. 162 Cornelia Marvin to Arnold B. Hall, Decem- ber 24, 1928, C. M. Pierce Papers. 63 Salem Journal (Ore.), December 19, 1928.