A "The Visible College" LING HWEY JENG, EDITOR Building Support Services for African- American Students: Part I Howard F. McGinn This paper was presented at the 2001 Association for Library and Information Science Education Annual Conference, January 9-12, 2001, in Washington, D.C. Overview Student-support services play an impor- tant role in recruiting and retaining African- American students. A success- ful program must provide a student sup- port structure for important areas of daily life and for student life in the uni- versity. Four important areas of support services for daily living are discussed in this issue: safety, housing, worship, and personal care needs. In the next issue support services for student life - acceptance, mentoring/advising, social life, and student financial concerns will be discussed. These documents will rec- ommend steps an institution can take to support students. It is important to note that while white students need many of the same support services, African- American stu- dents bring with them a distinct, rich, and complex culture and perspective in which there often are no parallels in the white culture. Daily events that go unno- ticed by a white student might have a significant effect on an African- American student. Be aware of the omnipresence of racism. It would be wise to assume that there will be ele- ments of racism present in your town or institution even though discernable problems have not occurred. These suggestions are not intended to give you information about every- thing that you need to know. That is impossible. You will learn if you take time to meet and talk with students and get to know them as persons. Support Services for Daily Life It would seem obvious that student adjustment to the community beyond the walls of the university is essential in recruiting and retention. Too often little thought is given to these student needs. Here are some strategies for easing stu- dents into their new environment. Super Strategy: The African- American Grandmother7 Grandmothers play a pivotal role in African- American society. They provide wisdom and comfort. They teach, they 264 Volume 42, Number 3
"77ie Visible College" 265 About the Author Howard F. McGinn is Dean of University Libraries, Clarion University, Clarion, Pa. discipline, they set moral standards. They provide cultural continuity and cohesion in the community. Hire an 'African- American Grandmother"' The person, of course, does not have to actually be a grandmother. The person should have deep roots in the commu- nity and be acknowledged as influential and important. The grandmother will counsel, mentor, and help with many of the students' adjustments to daily life. The grandmother will help provide a sense of home, especially during bouts of homesickness the student may exper- ience upon arrival. In the southern United States there is a large rural African-American popu- lation. The chances of rural institutions identifying a "grandmother" to work with the students should be very good. Institutions that are rural but located fairly close to an urban area may expe- rience some difficulty in hiring a grand- mother because of the cost of commuting. This minor barrier can be overcome by increasing her salary to reflect the cost of commuting or by building a travel-reimbursement clause into any agreement with the person. Institutions that are rural and not near an urban center may have to resort to other strategies. (It is this writer's experience that the grandmother will eventually become a confidant for white students. When this occurs, a major step in creat- ing a racially harmonious atmosphere among students and faculty will have been taken.) Major Considerations Safety Students will usually research your town and campus before applying or moving. If there is a history of local crime, steps have to be taken to counter- act the students' perception that the town or campus are not safe. Please keep in mind that present reality does not always match perception. A student may perceive your city or campus to be dan- gerous because of anecdotal information. Rural folks often make the assump- tion that they live in total safety and are isolated from the terrible problems that they believe plague people in the cities. Rural areas, of course, have many of the same problems as the cities. African Americans may face unique safety problems in rural areas, especially in those areas where there is not a large historic African-American population. Usually African-American students will be accepted and experience few difficulties in the town where the uni- versity is located. Safety problems may exist in the small towns and areas that border the university town. While rural white residents in the South will not think twice about seeing an African American, rural white resi- dents in areas where there are not many African Americans will notice black people immediately. In most cases, white residents in these areas will welcome African Americans and friendships can form rapidly. But there are often white supremacist organiza- tions in rural areas surrounding the university town. There will also be white residents whom, while they do Summer 2001
266 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science not belong to a white supremacist organ- ization, are sympathetic to the beliefs of the hate groups. One special note: Ask the county and town police for a copy of their policy (if any) regarding racial profiling. You need to monitor incidents where African American students may be pulled over while driving just because they are black. This is a common occurrence. Strategies 1. Tours - Give new students a com- prehensive tour of your town or city and the surrounding countryside. The tour should include historic, religious, entertainment, shopping, food store, medical, and cultural sites. Include other sites that will help adjustment. Ask the students what they would like to see. The tour should also include "good and bad neighborhoods"; especially those near the campus. A visit to typical apartments is important. Do not hesitate to point out neighbor- hoods that have a history of dis- crimination against minorities. The best tour guide is a long-time resi- dent of the area or someone who has a good understanding of the neigh- borhoods and surrounding towns. Brag about your city or town. Give the students a map of the area so that they can orient themselves. 2. Update Information - Prepare a handout for the student that includes recent positive newspaper and magazine stories about your town or city. Give the student an information packet provided by the Chamber of Commerce. Transportation This is a problem every student has: "How do I get to the university?" Strategy Information - When recruiting new stu- dents, provide information about air- ports, Amtrak stations, and bus stations. Provide a road map in case the student chooses to drive. Consider picking stu- dents up at the airport when they first come to your institution. In urban areas public transit is important. Provide a map of public transit routes. If the uni- versity has its own transit system, pro- vide a map that shows service to neighborhoods. Childcare Availability of professional, affordable, quality childcare is very important. Availability of childcare may be smart recruiting too. Strategies 1. Information - Provide lists of licensed day-care centers near the university. During the tour visit the centers. Introduce the student to the staff at the university day care center. Work with your African American grandmother in obtaining care. 2. Student Help - Check with the uni- versity's office of student services to see if it has a list of students inter- ested in "babysitting." Organize a special departmental group of stu- dent babysitters. This would also provide some income to the stu- dents in the group. Housing There are housing items that need spe- cial attention. Discrimination in housing is common, especially in apartments, legalities not withstanding. Sometimes African Americans are charged exces- sive deposit payments, and have diffi- culty obtaining phone and utility service Volume 42, Number 3
"The Visible College" 267 for no other reason than because they are black. Like many police depart- ments, apartment owners might "pro- file" African American customers in such a negative way that even if the applicant were a successful business person she or he might be denied a lease just because the person fits the "pro- file." (You will probably never see a written profile. It is illegal.) African American men have frequent problems with this practice in such normal things as service in a store, getting a taxi, or just driving a car. Strategies 1. Identification - Identify apartment owners and apartment complexes that discriminate. Contact African American organizations on campus, the Urban League, the NAACP (there are sometimes chapters in rural areas), realtor associations, governmental fair housing and rent control departments, the campus director of housing, the Better Business Bureau, African American churches, and other organizations that have knowledge of discrimina- tory practices. Compile a list of apartment facilities that have a rep- utation for discrimination. Give it to the students. In like manner, com- pile a list of facilities that have a reputation for treating African American tenants honestly and fairly. Distribute this list. Recommendations of white stu- dents might not be of much use since they would not have had problems with discrimination just because of their race. 2. Neighborhoods - Neighborhoods have reputations for discrimination and hate crime incidents. Show stu- dents neighborhoods that are near to the campus. Identify those neighbor- hoods that have a history of discrim- ination. Learn where the student wishes to live and see if that neigh- borhood has a history of discrimina- tory problems. In rural areas, surrounding towns may have reputa- tions for discrimination and hate crime incidents. Identify those towns that have a history of discrimination. Worship For most African American young peo- ple the church plays an important role in daily life. The church is a place where social contacts are made, where relief is sought from the strictures of general society, and where spiritual nourish- ment takes place. The church, for many African Americans, is the anchor in a world that is often abrasive. Identification of places of worship also helps students to acclimate themselves to new surroundings. White Americans belong to a broad range of religious denominations, and African Americans are no different. Many are Roman Catholic, many are Baptist, many belong to the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church, and so forth. While you will probably encounter very few stu- dents who belong to the Nation of Islam (Black Muslims), you may recruit stu- dents who belong to more traditional Islamic sects. Strategies 1. Talk and Meet - Ask students if they are interested in visiting places of worship. You won't need to go yourself. It would be good to become familiar with the various denominations in your city and the sites of their churches. Be sure to include religious centers on cam- pus. It may be difficult in rural areas to locate a church that is tradition- ally African American. (But not always. In Emporia, Kansas, for example, there are two churches Summer 2001
268 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science that are traditionally African American: St. Paul AME Church and St. James Baptist Church.) If there is no church in your town, see if the student wishes to visit churches in the nearest city. The campus minority student concerns organization may hold occasional religious services. If you do not have an understanding of Islam, make arrangements to introduce the student to Islamic clergy, faculty and students at the university's Islamic Center (if there is one). Many times a neighboring univer- sity has such a center and can be of help. 2. Update Information - Provide lists of places of worship listed by denominational category. Make sure the list contains addresses, tele- phone numbers, Web sites, and the name of the pastor. 3. Religious Practices - Ask each stu- dent if she or he has special reli- gious observances that you need to be aware of. Examples are dietary, alcohol, caffeine in soft drinks, holy days, and so forth. Most students will welcome this question because it will show that you honor their beliefs. Be aware that many African Americans say a silent prayer before eating, even in McDonalds. It is also common in the African American culture to open and close meetings of African American organizations with prayer. Personal Care African American students will usually shop at the same stores as everyone else. But certain personal care items are unique to African Americans and help in locating stores should be given to new students. The most unique items are hair care for men and women and make-up for women. Strategies 1. Hair Care/Cosmetics - Provide a list of stores and a map to enable stu- dents to begin shopping. Make sure that the barbershops and beauty salons listed have professional employees who are African American or, ideally, are owned by African Americans. Latino barbers and hairdressers are often popular with African Americans. Braiding is very popular. Many times other African American or African stu- dents braid hair in their homes. Check with the African American organizations on campus or with the African American sororities and fraternities for suggested names. It will be helpful to provide a list of African American beauty supply shops in the neighborhoods. These stores carry a wide variety of per- sonal care products not sold in larger stores or stores that have few African American customers. Some lines of cosmetics (e.g., Fashion Fair) tightly control their franchises and can only be purchased at large apartment stores such as Nordstrom or Filene's. Because this will vary from city to city, call the store before you recommend. Stores, salons, and barbershops in rural areas that offer products and services to African Americans are difficult to locate. Hair care products for women can sometimes be purchased at local beauty prod- ucts stores or at national chain stores such as Wal-Mart. If the stu- dent uses Fashion Fair cosmetics or similar product lines, the only solu- tions are to travel to a nearby city and obtain the products by mail or on the Internet. 2. Clothing - Many stores sell lines of hosiery that offer shades attractive to African American women, but some- times locating hosiery items can be Volume 42, Number 3
"The Visible College " 269 difficult. Word of mouth is the best strategy. Ask African American fac- ulty, staff, and students if there is dif- ficulty and ask for suggestions for stores. Make a list for distribution. Some students like to wear Afrocentric clothing. Many stores carry these styles. Encourage stu- dents to wear African styles to class. Food Services One final comment needs to be made regarding food services. Many African American students may have food requirements and tastes that are not nec- essarily satisfied in campus cafeterias. Some requirements may be because of religious practices. Many students will just want the types of food and food preparation they had at home and that are common to African American cul- ture. If your campus cafeterias do not have African American items on their menus, help the student find informa- tion about restaurants that have "soul food" menus and food markets that carry a wide variety of food items of interest to African Americans. Educators and library school stu- dents who would like to write about teaching methodology, abstract arti- cles, or comment on specific teaching methods are invited to send their con- tributions to Ling Hwey Jeng, Associate Professor, School of Library and Information Science, University of Kentucky, 502 King Library South, Lexington, KY 40506-0309; email: lhjeng00@ukcc.uky.edu. Summer 2001