Library Education in Israel SHMUEL SEVER This article describes the history of library education in Israel as observed and recorded by an active participant in a portion of its development. As such, some measure of subjectivity is to be expected. (Written from a different perspective, a thorough survey of Israeli library education until the 1960's is provided by C. D. Wormann, 1963.) Although historical periods are included in this account, it should be remembered that when considering any social process, clear demarcation cannot be made and the divisions here merely mark major turning points. LIBRARY EDUCATION can be understood only within the framework of the social environment and the library scene in a given country - it is shaped by the demands presented by the library commu- nity as well as shaping it.1 A few introductory remarks concerning the Israeli library scene are necessary before analyzing the topic. The trends and patterns that characterize the library situation in Israel reflect the influences of different cultural traditions and attitudes and the following traditions have left their marks on Israeli librarianship. The Jewish learned tradition. Books, reading, and learning have always had a special role in the collective identity of the Jewish people. Literacy and learning were nearly universal characteristics among Jews even in the Middle Ages when in non-Jewish societies reading and writing were the Sever is Director of the Library and Chairman of Library Studies, University of Haifa, Haifa 31-999, Israel. 208
Library Education in Israel privilege of small elite groups.2 The Jewish religion presupposes a direct approach to the Deity through reading and learning which consequently became (at least while Jewish life was centered on religion) the most important norm of behavior among Jewish males.3 Adjoining every synagogue there existed a special informal institution for adult education called the "Beit Midrash" which enabled men to study when the day's work was over. In every Beit Midrash there was a book collection contain- ing the Bible, its commentaries, the Talmud and other religious works. These collections can be considered proto-public libraries inasmuch as they had several features in common with modern Western public li- braries: The collection was public property, shared by the whole commu- nity; the books were either donated or bought out of public funds; every member of the community and even the occasional visitor was free to read these books; there were even some arrangements for "inter-library loans" for rare or especially expensive books; and finally and most important - the Beit Midrash served as the cultural center and meeting place for the community.4 Along with the tradition of the Beit Midrash we find the attribution of a public role even to private collections. Lending books was a common practice among Jews from the Middle Ages onwards. A Jew was required to buy books and lend them not only to friends but to any other Jew.5 Even when religion ceased to be the dominant part of the Jewish way of life educational attainment and learning remained a norm, although it was transformed from a religious duty into a norm of voluntary self- improvement.6 These bookish traditions brought about a dichotomous attitude toward libraries: on the one hand, the love of books, the importance of learning and the Beit Midrash were hospitable to the library development. On the other hand, the norm of acquiring and lending books among private people, while undeniably fostering use of books and reading, replaced to some extent libraries with private and communally owned collections and thus somewhat diminished the need for real libraries. The American library tradition. Although it is taken for granted that the American library model and tradition is known to the English speaking reader, those of its characteristics which influenced Israeli librarianship should be emphasized. The most outstanding characteristic of the Ameri- can library tradition is its role in society. Ideally, in America ". . . librarians have long seen themselves as very special guardians of the democratic ideals: their libraries were supposed to be open to all, serving all persons, regardless of color or creed, responsive to an endless variety of interests and particularly sensitive to the need to protect the rights of minorities against the conformity inherent in majority rule."7 While this idea has not 209
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP been fully implemented in the United States, the very existence of this ethos is significant, and in our opinion this is what makes it compatible with the Jewish tradition of the Beit Midrash. The American library model is a reader-centered one - the collection is meant to reflect the interests of the community, and its organization on open shelves allows direct access of the user to the reading material. Moreover, book selection is guided to a significant extent by the readers' demands and not only by the aim to educate the community. All these make the American library an institution which is at least ideally central to the entire community - very much like the Beit Midrash to the Jewish community during the Middle Ages. The Continental European library tradition until World II. This tradition, which is best illustrated by the German library tradition, was brought by the Jewish refugees from Germany in the thirties. It differentiates be- tween two distinct types of libraries: university and learned libraries to serve the intellectual elite and "popular libraries" (Volksbibliotheken) for the "common" people. The German university libraries as well as the universities themselves were established by the state or municipality. The chief librarian usually had the right to decide how the financial resources were to be distributed but the professors were allowed to exert a strong influence on the library and its functioning. The German university library usually consisted of a main closed stack library, under the jurisdiction of a director (often a professor), and several departmental libraries exclusively under the jurisdiction of the head of the department. These departmental (seminar) libraries allowed open access to their collections but did not lend books except by the personal discretion of the professor in charge. The univer- sity library chiefly answered the needs of teaching and research at the University, but at the same time it also functioned as a scholarly municipal or state library catering to the learned elite.8 The public libraries of the German library tradition came into existence primarily to educate the people through collections of "carefully selected books" which were supposed to have a benevolent influence on them. These libraries with their closed stacks and collections of "good litera- ture," sustained the image of "an institution where the underprivileged could borrow sober books for little money - which by the way was often collected for pedagogical reasons. Little wonder a strong 'sales resistance' was built up among all those who would not identify themselves socially with such presumed patronage and among those who would not get near such popular libraries with small collections of painfully selected litera- ture accessible only through a librarian determined to educate."9 The German tradition of learned libraries has some common features 210
Library Education in Israel with the Jewish tradition, inasmuch as both respect learning and scholarly excellence per se. Thus the German tradition could, in certain cir- cumstances, shape some of the realities of the early Israeli library scene. The preponderance in Israel of scholarly and university libraries over the public and school libraries reflects the influence of this tradition. The Socialist library tradition of Eastern and Central Europe. Among the cultural traditions brought to pre-state Israel by immigrants from Eastern Europe was the socialistic tradition favoring widespread cultural activities among the masses. This tradition, based on the popular town library in Poland or Russia, regarding private ownership of books as an ideal and libraries as a second best substitute for people having no books of their own. These libraries stressed some of the principles of the modern public library, such as public ownership and nominal or no fees, but the organi- zation of services was considered to be unimportant. These libraries were in fact rooms filled with books lacking any organization and with librar- ians determined to educate in the socialistic vein: a socialistic variation of the German popular library.10 The Danish library tradition. The Danish library tradition, which started as a European adaptation of the Anglo-American library model, is based on a library law which provides for a network of libraries. This system of small libraries is coordinated by the government which participates in the library budgets according to a scale defined by law and without interfer- ing with local decisions and policies which are left to the local librarian and community.11 The Danish attitude stresses the provision of culture and education rather than entertainment but book selection is made by the local librarian with the assistance of a variety of bibliographic publications - thus there is an interesting interplay between local freedom of choice and centralized influence.12 The Danish model was adopted by the Israeli Ministry of Education in the sixties when it tried to attain two main goals: 1) The widespread development of public libraries in a society whose cultural features were similar to the European ones and which stressed the development of scholarly libraries (adopting the Danish model facilitated the creation of local libraries, without a patronizing approach); 2) Central government participation in financing public libraries without the intereference with local needs and freedom of choice. Having sketched the traditions which influenced pre- and post-state Israeli librarianship we can now come to the analysis of our subject, and survey the development of library education in Israel within the framework of the general library scene. The Laying of Foundations and Ground-breaking - 1920-1935. The Jews who re-settled in their ancestral homeland from the 19th century onwards 211
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP brought with them the Jewish East-European tradition of libraries and reading. Thus, soon after the arrival of the first waves of immigrants, the traditional pattern of public book collections without organization or readers' services, was transplanted to Israel (then Palestine). Small librar- ies were established in most of the new settlements by the settlers them- selves, often with the assistance of the Federation of Jewish Labour (Histadruth). A United Nations publication describing the library scene of the beginning of the twentieth century reported: "The men and women who built the Kibbutz movement were in the main intellectuals from Europe. While they deliberately changed their occupation to that of farmers, they wanted at the same time to create an educated cultured peasant class . . . Practically every collective settlement has its own library . . . Each Moshav Ovdim [a cooperative of individual farm units] has a cultural committee which plans and executes local programs. . . . This committee also concerns itself with the maintenance of the local library."13 Public libraries were opened and later expanded in larger urban settle- ments like Jaffa, Tel- Aviv, and Haifa. These were mainly based on collec- tions donated by Zionists abroad and by some of the wealthier immi- grants, and supplemented by the insignificant budgets which could be afforded by the local Jewish authorities (the British Mandatory govern- ment did not participate in Jewish education, cultural matters and ex- penses). Superimposed on the local library service was the Jewish National and University Library (JNUL) which had been conceived even before its establishment as providing a type of public library service.14 Since its establishment in 1920 the JNUL served as a public library for Jerusalem, as a central library for all the Yishuv (the Jewish population in Palestine prior to 1948) sending books by mail to all readers requesting them in all settlements, and the national library of Judaica for the entire Jewish people.15 From 1926 it also served as the university central library of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. When all the population to be served by the Jewish library system numbered 150,000 (during the twenties) to 300,000 people (in the early thirties),16 and when most of this population was of European extraction with high cultural ideals and leanings, local collections with additional service from the JNUL as a central public library, in addition to its national and university roles, were workable, adequate and economically feasible. The first attempts to establish library education were made in the framework of this library scene. The first to realize the importance of professional education for librarians was Hugo Bergmann, librarian and philosopher, who came from the University of Prague. He was appointed 212
Library Education in Israel National Librarian in 1920 and served in this office until 1935 when he resigned and stayed on as a professor of philosophy at the Hebrew University (died in 1976). As director of the JNUL he sent several of his young workers abroad for professional education in Britain, the United States, and especially to an American Library Association sponsored course in Paris. Thus about a score of librarians were given scholarships to study in American-oriented library schools. The librarians thus trained were joined in the 1920's by others who arrived from Europe and the United States - among them two librarians who were invited in order to train the staff of JNUL, Ruth Kahn-Eber and Sophie Udin.17 Thus he built what he meant to be the core of a professional leadership.18 In order to attract outstanding people with high academic achievement to libraries and to the fledgeling profession, Bergmann also invited scho- lars of stature to join the staff of JNUL, despite the fact that they had no formal training in librarianship. In this way the libraries received the benefit of high-level subject expertise, but at the expense of a library education tradition. This trend was continued and reinforced after Bergmann's tenure. Subsequently, when librarianship came to be re- garded as a clerical occupation, this tradition of librarians with subject expertise but lacking professional qualifications in librarianship rein- forced the idea that high level professional qualifications in librarianship were not essential to the development of library services. This was not Bergmann's intent. It seems that he believed in academic and highly professional library education for the staff of the larger libraries. For the staff of the smaller libraries he was content with a more sketchy training, however, he still expected them to be much more than clerks. Bergmann held that libraries could and should be active cultural agencies. He re- garded the American library model of open-shelf libraries, open-minded librarians, live books, and a library service as a basic cultural institution, a logical solution for local library service in a community numbering a few hundred-thousand people.19 Moreover, he probably believed the Ameri- can library model to be compatible with the needs of the Jewish commun- ity in Palestine in emphasizing the centrality of the reader to all library activities.20 Therefore he advocated small local libraries as cultural centers and attempted to organize such libraries throughout the country into an informal network, with the JNUL providing leadership and specialized service. Since he considered teachers the main cultural agents in the then small communities, he felt that they should take charge of local libraries and be trained accordingly. Thus he proposed that curricula in teachers' colleges include 30 hours of training in basic concepts of librarianship. These teachers could and should serve as a link between the small settlement 213
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP libraries.21 Therefore, while he urged basic training for librarianship to be given to future teachers in the settlements, he also believed in the importance of genuine professional education for university librarians. Standstill and deterioration - 1936-1947. The 1930's were marked by political upheavals in Europe and economic difficulties among the Jews of Palestine. The large German Jewish immigration of the thirties (250,000 refugees) caused the cultural atmosphere of the Yishuv to become much more elite-centered. Among the new immigrants from Germany there were many professors who, unlike their predecessors, seldom came from idealistic motives. They joined the staff of the Hebrew University, which, from its establishment until today, runs and administers JNÙL. The academic climate of the Hebrew University, and consequently the expec- tations from the library serving it, changed - library services were ex- pected to be more elitist and congenial with what existed in the German universities of the 1920's. This brought upon the resignation of Bergmann and the appointment of Gotthold Weil, former head of the Oriental Department of the Preussische Staatsbibliothek, as national li- brarian. During Weil's service, and to a large extent due to his approach to libraries and librarianship, the structure and goals of the JNUL changed from those patterned after the American library model to those of the German library tradition of a scholarly university library for the intellec- tual elite, sponsoring popular libraries based mainly on fiction for the rest of the population.22 This change towards the German orientation, which may have been implemented with more vehemence than required, due to the personality of Weil himself, brought about a fundamental change in the attitude to librarianship as a profession and it came to be regarded as a clerical occupation. Excepting managerial and/or senior staff in the larger libraries, who were expected to have academic qualifications (although not necessarily library education), people working in libraries were con- sidered clerical staff needing only the most superficial training, mostly in techniques of bibliographic organization.23 Thus people working in li- braries were trained for periods ranging from one day to a week, as a report of Weil reveals: "As a result of two official trips which I undertook in 1943, when I inspected fifty libraries in communal and other agricul- tural settlements, a course of one week's duration for librarians in work- ers' settlements was arranged in February 1944, in which the whole library staff participated. The libraries of some village councils and municipalities, too, were inspected at their request and their librarians trained at our library for some time."24 Short and inadequate as it was, the one week course was nevertheless a genuine contribution, since no other form of library education existed, but it nevertheless marked the change 214
Library Education in Israel in trend from professional education to clerical training. In the JNUL itself, on-the-job training became the main way to add new members to the staff when librarians with training abroad were not available.25 Thus library education /œr se was not deemed necessary dur- ing the thirties and forties. Since the existing libraries could still fulfill the needs of the society, which was book centered but not library conscious,26 no pressure was forthcoming to improve and develop library organization or professional services. The population was still small enough - 467,000 in 1940 and 630,000 in 194727 - to be served by the existing library framework. Moreover, it was mainly. of Eastern and Central European origin, and did not expect library services other than those already existing - services catering to the intellectual elite (which in Israel included Kibbutz settlers) on the one hand, and the provision of reading material - mainly fiction - for the rest of the population. In addition, the economic and social conditions discouraged any emphasis on developing the library system. The Yishuv was emerging from the economic crisis of the 1930's - its agriculture and industry were just beginning to develop, it was absorbing at a great speed masses of immigrants, and the country was geared towards coping with the effects of World War II, and later towards the struggle for independence. With all of these problems in the forefront of public and governmental attention, any "crisis" in library service - in- cluding the fact that there was virtually no education for librarianship - carried less than a high priority. Thus further development was arrested - at least for the time being - for lack of incentive rather than by force of the circumstances. It must be kept in mind that the main prerequisite for the creation of public libraries (as shown by the English or American experience), municipal self government, did exist in Israel long before statehood. The Yishuv developed a relatively complex and sophisticated national and local administration, which, informal as it had to be while the country was under British rule, was nevertheless highly efficient and effective. Thus, when it was deemed necessary this administration could and did develop a modern educational system, including two universities and several teachers' colleges. Had libraries been rated equally important they could have developed just as quickly and well. Obviously this was not the case, probably because of the influence of the cultural tradition introduced by the German immigrants. Nonetheless, until the end of the 1940's, the libraries seemed to be reflecting the needs of the society and providing services which were more or less adequate in relation to the expectations and the economic possibilities of the community. Re-awakening and First Significant Developments -1947-1 968. The period between 1947-1968 was one of both continuation and change. 215
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP While the German library traditions, attitudes, and techniques were on the whole predominant, new developments and substantial expansion did occur. The first 20 years of Israel coincide with the tenure of Curt Wormann as director of the JNUL (Wormann was undoubtedly a dominant figure of Israeli librarianship, involved in each and every aspect of the profession: director of JNUL, director of the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University and a senior teacher there, chairman of the Israeli Library Association (ILA), representative of Israel in the International Federa- tion of Library Associations (IFLA), advisor to libraries in Israel). These years were difficult with grave social and economic problems. Im- mediately upon Israel's independence in 1948 great waves of immigrants started to arrive: in the first years of Israel an average of 18,500 monthly. The veteran population as well as the state were faced with the problem of absorbing large numbers of newcomers. Immigrants from Europe were absorbed relatively easily: their background was similar in many ways to that of the veteran population and they could "manage" in a world which was familiar since it resembled the one they came from. But the situation was entirely different as to the 800,000 Jewish refugees from Arab coun- tries. They had lived for generations in close-knit, isolated communities, very far removed from the mainstream of modern, Western develop- ments. Social and cultural integration became the overriding considera- tion in all aspects of planning and policy in Israel and a multitude of agencies and programs dealt with the problem. Unfortunately the librar- ies were not geared to contribute towards the solution of the problem at the time, possibly because the changes occurring in the profession in the thirties and forties had weakened librarianship and libraries28 and also because all the efforts of the professional leadership were concentrated on the rebuilding of the JNUL after the loss of its premises and collection on Mount Scopus in the War of Independence.29 The reorganization of the JNUL also delayed the establishment of a library school in Israel. Wormann had advocated the founding of a library school since his appointment as director of JNUL in 194730 but the question of a library school was postponed until the JNUL's rebuilding had been completed. Wormann stated the following reasons necessitating the establishment of a library school: "After the establishment of Israel the need for librarians increased from year to year in public libraries, libraries of institutions of higher learning, and newly founded special libraries. . . . The half million Jewish books salvaged from Europe and brought to Israel urgently needed processing for all the libraries in the country. . . . Many Jewish scholars . . . found a new life here [and] be- cause of the systematic destruction of European centers of Jewish learn- 216
Library Education in Israel ing and culture, Jewish research . . . [was] carried on mainly in Israel and in the United States. For all these reasons it was impossible to delay tackling the question of a library school."31 Although Wormann only mentioned in passing the need for librarians in public libraries among the reasons necessitating a library school, this did not mean that he was not aware of the issue. Earlier in the same article he stated the problem, saying: ". . . the Director and many staff members [of JNUL] contributed to various activities in the sphere of education for librarianship. Together with the Division for Public Libraries in the new Ministry of Education and Culture and with the Library Department of the Histadruth, the National Library prepared intensive short courses on different levels for librarians who were already working in libraries, or who were prospective candidates for public and school library posts. Their tasks and significance increased almost from month to month as mass immigration to Israel brought with it the urgent problem of cultural ingathering of newcomers from different countries with varying backgrounds. Librarians from the main library in Jerusalem and from other libraries in the country lectured in these courses. In addition to these short courses in the form of lectures and seminars, the Histadruth tried tor some time to give instruction by correspondence."32 It seems indicated then, that Wormann approached the issue of a library school from a point of view different than that of Bergmann: the library school was urgently needed first and foremost in order to train librarians for research and scholarly libraries; as to librarians for public libraries - they could also benefit from academic library education although their train- ing was well taken care of by means of short courses. A study of the library school's curriculum in its first years of existence also bears out the assump- tion that academic library education was not deemed necessary for the staff of at least the small public libraries (most public libraries were small then). Their training was not considered to be a primary task of the new library school. However, the founding of the library school was in itself a huge step forward in the history of library education in Israel, since it meant the beginning of systematic education for librarianship as a profes- sion. After the reorganization of JNUL had been completed in 1954, Wor- mann re-opened the question of a library school and requested the assis- tance of a UNESCO specialist to advise about opening a library school at the Hebrew University. Leon Carnovsky of the University of Chicago Graduate Library School consented to help in the project and submitted an extensive report in which he gave an over-all survey of Israeli librarian- ship, made imaginative proposals for the establishment of a library system in Israel and recommended action for the foundation of a library school. 217
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP In his recommendations Carnovsky included detailed proposals for every aspect of the library school: curriculum, admission requirements, degree awarded, teaching staff, facilities and administration. His propos- als were very flexible and adaptable since, as he put it: "No programme, however sound elsewhere, is necessarily sound in another climate or even in another period, it must always be evaluated in the light of conditions in the country immediately concerned."33 In addition, he stressed in his program the library's role in society. When the school was opened in 1956 Carnovsky's recommendations had only partly been implemented. Carnovsky had proposed a curriculum which stressed, by means of the subject content and the relative weight courses ought to have, the need for librarianship to concern itself with social issues. He stressed the need for flexibility and suggested that the proposed curriculum serve as a guideline for the school's first two or three years only. However, Carnov- sky's recommendations were implemented in a different spirit. The school's first curriculum neglected the library's role in society and re- mained essentially unchanged during the next 13 years. Wormann tes- tified in 1963 that "although there were changes in the curriculum as well as in methods and techniques the basic trends and principles remained the same."34 A perusal of the curricula of the Graduate Library School, and discussions with former students and teachers all show that very little changed for several years afterwards as well. Jacob Rothschild, who be- came the director of the Graduate Library School in 1969, described the curriculum of the school up to 1968 as follows: "Over-emphasis and even hypertrophy of certain subjects, such as classification and cataloguing followed these practical considerations [i.e., the adjustment and adapta- tion of the curriculum to the personalities of the teachers available, described earlier in Rothschild's paper] in spite of the fact that the relative importance of such subjects decreases with the advent of international and national cataloguing projects. Over-emphasis also made itself felt in the time devoted to bibliographical studies, where a descriptive approach and attention to minutiae took the place of bibliographical typology and search strategies."35 Rothschild also mentioned a 62 hour compulsory course in Judaica bibliography and a large number of frontal lectures on the history of writing and the history of libraries. Wormann's earlier description of the school's curriculum revealed how strongly technical subjects were emphasized: "The curriculum consists of both practical and theoretical subjects. The practical studies, such as cataloguing, classifica- tion, bibliography, library organization and administration are devoted to the principles of practical work in the fields (sic). The theoretical courses, such as the history of writing and printing, the history of the library and the modern library, are aimed at promoting understanding in the func- 218
Library Education in Israel tions of the libraries in the past and in the present. Special emphasis is placed on the library's role in the promotion of research, as well as on its social and educational tasks. At an advanced stage, students are expected to attend more specialized courses such as special problems of academic or special library, paleography, children's literature, subject cataloguing, etc. The general set-up of the school is very similar to that of the American graduate library schools, as well as the School of Librarianship and Ar- chives of the University of London. The theoretical subjects are also influenced by methods of academic training of librarians in France and Germany."36 It seems then, that although the school aimed at training towards "the future responsibilities of librarians as educators, helping to shape the cultural and spiritual physiognomy of the new society"37 and although the first announcement of the aims of the school stated that "Emphasis is laid . . . upon [librarianship's] social and educational role, especially in connec- tion with the integration of new immigrants into the cultural life of the nation,"38 as Rothschild concluded in his survey about the school's first 14 years, the theoretical approach and social emphasis were not part of the curriculum to any meaningful extent. Even specialized courses in public librarianship dealt mainly with the role of the public library as conceived of by the I.F.L.A. and UNESCO mainfesto, and with public library de- velopments abroad. The application of such ideas to the realities of Israel was given minor attention. In summary, the problem of the school's curriculum at least until 1968 was that it emphasized the traditional techniques of librarianship, and thus its graduates were trained to be transmitters of tradition - not innovators. This phenomenon probably stemmed from the fact that the curriculum was largely geared to the specific needs of JNUL, where a significant number of students eventually found employment. Since the German tradition prevalent in JNUL emphasized the technical aspects of librarianship, prospective librarians were expected to be well versed in standard techniques of book processing which were heavily emphasized in the educational program. In addition to the basic problem of the school's philosophy as expressed in its curriculum, there were other problems to be dealt with. Most of these problems were - and in fact still are - shared by other library schools in Israel. Carnovsky recommended that the library school not embark upon a master's program without a full-time faculty. This was not achieved until the late 1970's, although the school started granting M.A. degrees in 1972. Even today, in the library schools of Israel the majority of faculty is composed of full-time librarians who also serve as faculty members. Thus the teachers of the Hebrew University Graduate Library School have 219
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR UBRARIANSHIP always been librarians from JNUL and other libraries in the country. This situation does have the advantage of". . . the teacher's daily contact with library problems and his availability to students."39 However, a master's program should have some full-time faculty to give each student personal supervision and assist in his first attempts at research. It is not surprising then, that Mersky who served as director of JNUL in 1972/1973 wrote in his recommendations to the president of the Hebrew University: "The first requirement is a full-time teaching staff. It is shocking that a master's program should have only one full-time academic staff member, who also serves as director of the program."40 Closely connected with the problem of faculty was the question of research at the library school. Since members of the faculty were almost exclusively active librarians, they could rarely find time for serious re- search. Moreover, no funds were available for research projects (since librarianship was considered a clerical occupation and not a "profession"), nor was there faculty to direct such projects. The problem of research, like most other problems enumerated, are still shared by all library schools in Israel - although some improvement can be detected. Despite the above mentioned problems, the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University did fill a gap: for the first time people wishing to take up librarianship as their profession were offered academic, graduate training in the country itself. However, the majority of those working or intending to work in libraries did not avail themselves of the opportunity to study librarianship on a graduate level. Many libraries in Israel con- tinued to be run and staffed by non-professionals or para-professionals: people without a professional degree and often without any higher educa- tion. A 1962 survey shows that out of 667 people working public libraries, 479 had no library training whatsoever and 135 had only elementary schooling without even partial high school education.41 This follows from the German library tradition of the 1920's which held that positions of bibliographic control or public services in the public libraries required only technical or "clerical" training. This view has its advocates even today - in 1976 the chairman of the Israeli Library Association argued that academic training was not necessary in public libraries.42 Consequently there were and still are, various non-academic training programs for librarians. As previously mentioned, the first institute to concern itself with non- academic training was the Histadruth. Through its library department which supported numerous libraries of the socialist tradition, it organized courses of varying length on basic aspects of librarianship. The library department also published bibliographical lists and basic books in librar- ianship (such as a Hebrew, abridged Dewey Decimal Classification) which 220
Library Education in Israel served as textbooks for these courses.43 Until the 1960's these were the only training programs open to people lacking higher education. From the early 1960's the Extension Service of the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology) instituted a non-academic course for special libraries. These non-academic courses (of 100-200 hours each) were con- centrated in the major towns, and in the earlier stages, the instruction they offered was relatively uncoordinated. In the early 1960's, these courses received new impetus because of several reasons. By this time it had become quite clear that the much sought integration of the immigrants from Arab countries was proceeding slower than expected. Since the integration of the disjointed Jewish communities from all over the world was considered more of a social than an ethnic problem, education, both formal and informal, was adopted by the government as the key to integration.44 C.I. Golan, the first director of the Library Section of the Ministry of Education saw the cultural and acculturational values of libraries within the above mentioned cultural policy. Consequently, the Library Section emphasized the development of public libraries in every settlement and especially in developing areas (new towns settled mainly by Jewish refugees from Arab countries),45 which led to an increased de- mand for library personnel. Since few graduates of the Hebrew Univer- sity Graduate Library School were available and people with academic background were also scarce, non-academic courses seemed to be the easiest and quickest solution, especially since the professional leadership, because of its German cultural tradition considered such training suffi- cient for public librarians, while library education, if in existence at all, was deemed necessary only for the staff of scholarly libraries. Since Golan insisted from the mid-sixties onwards that trained staff be a condition for the Library Section's financial assistance, these courses received new impetus. In 1958 the Israeli Library Association under the chairmanship of Wormann adopted the British principle of chartering librarians - sur- prisingly enough, since at the time the system had begun to dwindle in Britain itself. Moreover, Israel did not have the British age-old tradition of associations chartering the professional education of their prospective members. Chartering, when in use in Israel, was reserved for clerical and technical occupations; thus, I.L.A. chartering, coupled with the associa- tion's affiliation with the Histadruth, reinforced the attitude towards librarianship as a clerical occupation, an attitude existing since the thirties. A program of formal examinations was prepared and updated from time to time and thus accreditation was offered to high school graduates lacking academic qualifications.46 The I.L.A. examinations also attracted people to the courses, since now they could be formally accredited upon successfully completing them. 221
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP The courses were on two levels, each about 200 hours of teaching. Level A concentrated on the technical aspects of librarianship: Jewish and general bibliography; simple cataloging and classification; some elemen- tary notions of library administration (mainly ready-made recipes on where to buy and what); simple circulation methods, etc. Classification was according to Dewey, but teaching put relatively little emphasis on the principles behind Dewey classification. Level.B contained some notions of UDC for those who might work in special libraries, more general ad- ministration, as well as more detailed cataloging. The examinations also were on two levels, more or less corresponding to the two levels of courses available. People who sat for I.L.A. examina- tions and passed them satisfactorily received formal diplomas: as "assis- tant librarian" for graduates of level A exams and "librarian" for graduates of level B exams. (Graduates of the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University were given formal diplomas of "qualified librar- ian.") I.L.A. also gave diplomas to people actively engaged in librarian- ship for over ten years, without demanding formal examinations, thus making it possible for veteran librarians lacking formal training to be recognized, and not to be at a disadvantage with respect to non- experienced, but formally accredited colleagues. The chartering pro- gram of I.L.A. had little professional impact until the mid-sixties as there was no quality or quantity control over the courses. The change for the better occurred when Golan initiated the establish- ment of the Center for Public Libraries according to the Danish model which he found most suitable to Israeli conditions. In 1967 the center took over the organization of these courses and brought some order to non- academic training for librarianship. Course curricula became more stan- dardized, with more or less similar requirements for all courses, except those under auspices of the Technion which were more technically- oriented. The center also insisted that the teachers have a graduate library school background and determined the number of hours devoted to each subject. New subjects were introduced into the curriculum as the need arose, particularly in the courses for public librarians. Thus, for instance, a few lectures on the social aspects of librarianship were introduced. However, from the point of view of the I.L.A. exams, these subjects were of secondary importance. The courses were patterned rather closely on the first curriculum of the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University. However, as the educational background of the students was mainly high school educa- tion, independent thought and individual work were even less em- phasized and the clerical attitude was stressed even more so. The lectures were mainly enumerative, giving lists of rules and facts, with little em- 222
Library Education in Israel phasis on the basic ideas. The historical aspects of library development did not receive the same emphasis as at the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University. The teachers of these courses were working librarians, who looked upon their teaching activities as a minor part-time occupation. Under such conditions there could obviously be little coordination of the teach- ing material and methods used by the various teachers. Thus, the level of proficiency attained by the various graduates was very uneven, both in specific skills and general principles, depending upon the individual teacher's skills. In spite of their many shortcomings these courses did serve to raise the standard of services (which was admittedly low) in many small public libraries, by enforcing at least high school education and familiarity with some library techniques, absent before. They also succeeded in providing their graduates with a sense of professional pride. Thus, although these courses could by no means be considered the ideal way to train librarians, they were at least one step in raising the standards of library training in Israel. Towards Professionalization - 1968-1979. The 1960's brought higher standards of living, increased awareness of scientific advances abroad and an awareness of the relative limitations of educational services available in Israel. As the young country developed, there was an ever-growing de- mand for highly skilled people with formal qualifications. The sophistica- tion and specialization of the 1960's, together with worldwide advances in education, revealed the inadequacy of the small country's resources of information. At the same time, there was increased pressure for more opportunities for academic education, which was seen as a way to more lucrative and more pleasant occupations.47 These factors combined brought about the establishment of new universities and the development of the existing ones, so that by the 1970's there were seven universities in the country. The accelerated academic activity brought about a slow but growing acknowledgement of libraries' and librarians' importance in access to information. At this time, the traditional professional library leadership was retiring and it became all too clear that the younger generation of librarians had not been adequately prepared to meet the challenges facing them.48 Moreover, mainly as a result of the activities of the Library Section of the Ministry of Education, libraries were in the midst of a process of gradual upgrading, and the lack of qualified librar- ians was strongly felt.49 Thus the problem of education for librarianship came more to the fore. The first attempts to change the existing patterns of academic library education were made at the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University in 1968, as described by Rothschild: 223
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP More than 'two or three years' (as recommended by Professor Carnovsky) were to elapse before an appraisal was made whether the Graduate Library School ought to step towards a full academic programme. A decisive step was taken in this direction with the proposal of Shmuel Sever, today the Director of the University of Haifa Library, who was excutive secretary of the Graduate Library School in 1968/69. He proposed to prepare a prog- ramme towards an M.A. degree. According to this proposal, studies could be extended over a two-year period and should include other subjects needed by the modern librarian: communication of information, implications of automation in libraries, an introduction to information science, etc. Moreover, since most research projects in the organization and management of libraries are based on quantitative analyses and on experiments - the pupils were to be trained in research methods and some introductory statistics. Another characteristic departure from former teaching methods was the widening of the scope of électives. These subjects had in the early years of the school not been more than variations in addition to required courses. The expansion of the number of elective courses now enables our students to specialize in certain aspects of librarianship. But even now the number of courses the student is required to take is relatively larger than usual in library schools abroad. In the Master's course, there are now still 16 hours of obligatory courses as against 1 1 électives. We considered it our duty towards our students to set aside a large number of hours for required courses, so as to permit greater mobility from one type of library to another.50 These changes in the curriculum of the Graduate Library School brought the master's program more in line with Carnovsky's recommen- dations and with the actual needs of library science in Israel. However, sometimes only the title of the courses sounded modern while contents followed former patterns and there are people who believe that the school still tended strongly towards technical training for a long time afterwards. Furthermore, the problem of staff and research shortcomings, described above, also remained unsolved for almost another decade. By the end of the 1970's, towards the end of Rothschild's tenure as director of the Graduate Library School, further improvements occur- red: two of the school's teachers finished their Ph.D.'s in the United States and the curriculum was expanded by the addition of new courses. How- ever, the student's freedom of choice was limited: every student had to choose a trend of specialization (e.g., academic libraries, public libraries, special libraries), but within his specialization he had to attend a struc- tured and predetermined program. Thus, for example, the school's cur- riculum for 1978/79 described the structure of the studies as follows: "The curriculum consists of practical-technical subjects, training for the organization of libraries and their management, and theoretical subjects which endow students with the socio-cultural background of the profes- sion and which train him for research work. The courses are divided into required and elective courses. . . In every specialization the student may choose to take elective courses of another specialization, provided that he can justify this with good arguments and the Director of the School or the Advisor agrees to these changes."51 224
Library Education in Israel Further changes may occur after the appointment of D. Shidorsky as director of the school in 1979, but it is as yet too early to evaluate their impact. In the 1 970's other academic library programs were started. Ini 970/7 1 the University of Haifa entered the library education scene by organizing a two-year course for holders of the B.A. degree. This course was the outcome of an agreement between an Information Center of the Ministry of Defense, the Technion Library and the University of Haifa. All three institutions had found that they could not obtain trained academic librar- ians in northern Israel, both because the best graduates of the Graduate Library School in Jerusalem were usually recruited by the JNUL, and also because many of them were married women who were unlikely to move far from central Israel.52 The course was organized with the specific aim of training manpower for the sponsoring institutions and the curriculum was geared to their requirements and divided into three main fields: 1) bibliographies, cataloging and classification, 2) library management, in- cluding social aspects of librarianship, and 3) information retrieval and computer techniques. The students were recruited primarily from per- sonnel already employed, plus a few people recruited from outside. The certificate awarded was recognized only by the three institutions which participated in the course. The faculty was also recruited from these institutions. It included primarily three librarians with M.A. degrees from the United States and an engineer, who had expertise in information retrieval. Other teachers were recruited on a part-time basis among the faculty in other departments of the University of Haifa. The need for professional librarians in the northern part of Israel as well as the personal interest of the group of librarians mentioned above, prompted the transforming of this course into a regular library school. However, until 1972 the University of Haifa was academically dependent upon the Hebrew University and new programs at Haifa had to be approved by the relevant departments in Jerusalem. Haifa applied for such approval, but it was denied. Immediately upon the academic independence of the University of Haifa a program of library studies was established in 1972/73, as part of the Faculty of Humanities. The new school tried to implement some of the ideas and trends proposed by Carnovsky in the fifties. It attempted to reach the goals of a comprehensive approach to librarianship, flexibility and periodical revision of attitudes and methods, as well as a policy of commitment to the Israeli society. The school is oriented towards educating librarians to deal with people, their needs and expectations, not less than with the organization and dissemination of knowledge and with the organization of materials and 225
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP new technologies. The school tries to stress goals and principles rather than techniques - a somewhat unique approach in Israel. The school also tries to achieve integration into the mainstream of the university, both by attracting faculty from other departments to teach courses in the school and by sending students to courses in other departments. This was partly done as a remedy to the poverty of the school, but it is also a deliberate attempt to integrate within the university, and students from other de- partments are encouraged to take courses in the library school. At present, specialization can be in either of three main areas: academic librarianship, public librarianship, or information sciences. However, the framework of specialization has been left somewhat vague on purpose, so as to enable each student to follow his own inclinations as freely as possible. The students are granted a diploma at the end of their two years of graduate study. Beginnings of a system of tutors have also been introduced. However, the system, which enables each student to choose one of the teachers in order to advise him with the curriculum and with any problem encoun- tered in the studies, has not been functioning as satisfactorily as wished. As the number of students is kept small, for lack of faculty, the students become well acquainted with all the teachers and they prefer discussing any problems arising in a given course with the lecturer teaching it. The library of the University of Haifa, which has provided most of the faculty members and whose director also heads the library school, pro- vides the facilities of a laboratory and the means for research for the school. The existence of a common head for the university library and Library Studies Department is as yet satisfactory, but it presents the same shortcomings it had in the United States many years ago. Library studies at Haifa share with the Jerusalem school the need for a full-time faculty and research programs, as well as the shortcomings of decision-making and basic responsibility of one person - an unelected director (the author of this paper). In 1973 a new experiment in library education was made at Bar-Ilan University near Tel- Aviv. The initiative to open a Department of Biblio- graphic and Library Studies at Bar-Ilan University came from the then dean of the Faculty of Humanities and from several other teachers of the university, who felt that Israeli librarianship needed another approach than that of the Hebrew University Graduate Library School, especially with regard to the subjects connected with Judaica and Humanities. There may also have been some concern in orthodox religious circles (which have a strong involvement at Bar-Ilan), regarding the future development of public librarianship in relation to a library law, which meant to make public libraries mandatory in every settlement. Thus, 226
Library Education in Israel training librarians with an orthodox outlook was thought desirable by the school to provide for the needs of orthodox settlements. Courses in specialized bibliography are being taught by teachers from the relevant departments, while teaching of library techniques is done by librarians. Several librarians were asked for advice and cooperation, in- cluding Rothschild, the director of the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University. The school offers two alternative courses of studies: 1) librarianship as a minor course in a B.A. degree program in which the student receives a diploma in librarianship in addition to his B.A. degree; 2) a course for holders of a B.A. degree with a study load similar to that required at other library schools; 24 weekly hours over one year (some 650 lecture hours). The students are granted a diploma upon completing their studies.53 One of the main complaints among librarians about the Bar Ilan pro- gram is that it introduces a lower degree program than the one existing: a B.A. degree as a valid professional qualification. The school shares with the two other library schools the lack of a full-time faculty and of research projects. In the late sixties and early seventies another form of graduate library training was experimented with - not so much out of preference as by force of circumstances. In 1966 Israel was hit by one of the worst economic recessions that it had ever experienced. The hardest hit sector of academic personnel were engineers, many of whom became un- employed. At the same time, as has already been mentioned, both academic and special libraries were growing and required trained academic manpower. The combination of these two factors brought about the organization of a course for re-training unemployed engineers and other technical personnel as information scientists. This course was or- ganized by the Ministry of Labor in cooperation with the Center of Scientific and Technological Information (COSTI). Despite the fact that this course claimed training in information science, its curriculum was essentially a library course, with some emphasis on the technological materials and their use which did not appear in the Hebrew University Graduate Library School curriculum. Some courses were devoted to automation, information retrieval and editing. The course was planned to last a year. In addition to the Ministry of Labor which financed the project and C.O.S.T.I. which organized it, the Weizmann Institute of Science agreed to sponsor it, even though it did not actively participate. Herbert Schur was invited from the University of Sheffield in Britain to organize the course, and has given a detailed description of it in the UNESCO Bulletin for Libraries.54 Seven participants eventually graduated from the course out of the initial 20, who had registered. 227
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP The main significance of the course lies not in the number of graduates it produced but in the fact that new aspects of librarianship were intro- duced for the first time into the curriculum of a library course. However, as it lacked a well-knit faculty cooperating with each other and engaging in research, it failed to evolve a comprehensive approach. It was also some- what unfortunate in its location: it was held in Tel- Aviv, not near a university, and lacked the services of even the model of a well-appointed library. The students visited and worked in several libraries, but the effect was not the same as using a given library as a laboratory. The course was not repeated the following year. It was again offered in 1970/71 under the direction of Lidia Vilentchuk, its initiator and a senior officer of CO. S.T.I, and 13 students graduated. This second course was also helped financially by an Information Center of the Ministry of Defence.55 No similar course has been held since then, although technical non-academic courses were sponsored by CO. S.T.I. Meanwhile, the non-academic courses continued and prospered, and in fact continue even today. Due to the intervention of the Library Section and the Center for Public Libraries, described above, with the ensuing salary improvements for course graduates, there has been undoubted progress in the level of courses and level of proficiency of their graduates, and consequently more and more people attend these courses. For exam- ple, by 1971 only 200 people had passed level B examinations, as com- pared to 436 people between the years 1972-1978 (Information given upon request in a letter from the secretary of I.L.A.). The training of I.L.A. chartered librarians has resulted over the years in several worrisome developments: 1. The majority of the trained staff of Israeli public libraries have been made up, with a few notable exceptions, by chartered librarians, who have had neither the education, nor the inclination, and definitely not the social prestige necessary to adapt libraries to the needs of the changing Israeli society. They may have been serving well the Israelis from Euro- pean extraction who, as mentioned above, have a deep-rooted respect for books and learning but traditionally have little expectations or demands from public libraries. For Israelis who arrived from the Arab countries during the mass immigration of 1948-1953, and for their descendants, the chartered librarians could not provide the leadership and imaginative service that could have made libraries part of their cultural integration process.56 2. Local authorities often prefer hiring chartered librarians, and not professional ones, because of the lower salaries of the former. For the same reason - less well paid positions - capable professionals rarely choose to work in public libraries. 228
Library Education in Israel 3. Since the non-academic training and the chartering by I.L.A. are a legitimate, alternative way of entering the profession, holders of B.A. degrees, unable to meet the graduate requirements of the library schools, often use it and fill professional positions without the professional qualifi- cations. 4. The numerical growth of chartered librarians, and their preponder- ance inside I.L.A., on the one hand make the association unattractive for many professionals and on the other hand have limited I.L.A. goals to narrow trade unionism compatible with the wishes of its electorate. (In this context it may be worthwhile noting, that after Wormann's retirement from the chairmanship of the association people lacking professional education in librarianship have been elected to key positions). Thus, I.L.A. opposition to any attempt to upgrade non-academic library educa- tion may be better understood. For several years now there has been an increased feeling among Israeli librarians that the training given in the non-academic courses is still insufficient. More and more people claim, that a librarian, and especially a public librarian, must have a broader educational background in order to succeed in his task. The special and university libraries which also employ non-academically trained manpower have also come to believe that the educational background of the librarians influences their ability and library performance and thus affects the running of the library as a whole. This trend is to a great extent the influence of Golan, who as mentioned above, was in turn influenced by the Danish library tradition in which the local librarian has a central task in his community.57 Since the local librarian in Denmark as well as in Israel has freedom of choice in all matters of policy and book selection, he is inevitably expected to be professionally trained. In accordance with these feelings and beliefs Golan, Shavit, Rothschild, Shidorsky and the author initiated raising the standards of training for non-academic librarians. After bitter deliberations in the Council for Public Libraries (established in 1976 following a provision made for it by the Public Library Law of 197558) the Council adopted the principle that people working in school and public libraries should have at least the same education as elementary school teachers (which in Israel is a non-degree program). The decision was based on the experiences gained in a pilot project which began in 1976 at Oranim Teachers Training College (linked with the Haifa University). The program was initiated by the Oranim College, the Center for Public Libraries, and the author of this paper who also serves as its director. The faculty is primarily associated with the library and the library school at the University of Haifa. The basic assumption behind the 229
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP establishment of the program and later behind the council's decision was, that no person can be culturally or educationally effective unless he has at least an education equivalent to that of the school teachers. This is espe- cially true of librarians, since more and more library users have an educa- tion equal to or above high school level. The training provided by the program puts the librarian on equal footing with other people employed in education, culture or social work, since it gives a broader cultural background and more of the social and theoretical aspects of librarianship than any other non-graduate course, as well as a diploma equivalent to that given to elementary school teachers.59 However, because of I.L.A.'s opposition to the upgrading of non-academic forms of library education the Oranim program was prevented from further expansion and de- velopment throughout the country. Israeli library education has undergone conceptual changes through- out its relatively short history in conjunction with the different ways the library's role in society was perceived - central versus marginal to society. When libraries were regarded as potential cultural and social centers of the community, reader-centered library models were adopted and the librarian was seen as a professional with important socio-cultural roles who had to be educated accordingly. But at times when libraries were aiming mainly at catering to the learned elite, a book-centered library model was adopted and librarianship came to be regarded as a clerical occupation for which superficial training or apprenticeship sufficed. The history of Israeli library education is in fact the history of the struggle between these two conflicting traditions, each of which has left its mark on subsequent developments. The beginning of modern Israeli librarianship and library education were part and parcel of the socio-cultural atmosphere of the small Jewish community in Palestine of the period following World War I. The idealis- tic pioneers, who came to rebuild their ancestral homeland, were intent upon restructuring the cultural and social patterns of the Jewish people. Among the many efforts made toward attaining this goal was Bergmann's struggle to build a modern model of Israeli librarianship based on Jewish cultural roots. He adopted the American model of the library as an agency of education and culture, compatible with the Jewish tradition - a choice which demanded, among other things, professional librarians. Therefore he saw to it that at least the librarians at the core of the profession be properly educated - not trained - in library schools abroad. Even for the staff of the small, local libraries he was not content with clerical- technical training and advocated instead education for librarianship which would enable them to be carriers of culture. In fact he intended that the teachers, who then were indeed carriers of culture, also have educa- 230
Library Education in Israel tion in librarianship and fulfill the role of librarians in the small settle- ments. From the mid-thirties the trend changed and instead of education for librarianship, which was deemed unnecessary, short periods of training in the technical aspects of librarianship were advocated. This change can hardly be attributed to anything but the influence of the traditional German approach to librarianship and libraries. The German library model of scholarly libraries run by scholars and staffed by clerks on the one hand, and popular libraries run by technically trained personnel, with little claim or inclination to social leadership, on the other hand, was brought to Palestine by the German refugees. The trend was all the more quickly accepted by the Jewish community since it was compatible with another facet of the Jewish traditional view of the centrality of books - but not libraries! - to culture.60 Thus, although during the thirties and forties a sophisticated, if informal, system of local and national authorities evolved in the country, despite economic and security hardships, the development of libraries and education for librarianship was arrested. This phenomenon is the outcome of the attitude of indifference towards libraries and their potential role in society, prevailing during the period. The establishment of the state brought about rapid economic develop- ment which created many job opportunities in the country. Many capable, though non-professional people working in libraries left for more lucra- tive positions and the libraries urgently needed people to fill their places. The time had arrived for the establishment of a library school in Israel and Wormann, the leading personality of Israeli librarianship for a gen- eration, did indeed establish such a school at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. There, molds adopted from the American system of education for librarianship were often filled with the contents of a European ap- proach to library training. In the late sixties and in the seventies additional library schools were established. Some attempts were made toward pro- fessionalization and professional education, but the residues of the ap- proach viewing librarianship as an occupation necessitating training, rather than a profession necessitating education, still exert a strong influ- ence on the library education scene. The concept that small libraries, and the middle and low positions in the larger libraries, did not call for professional librarians61 was put forward by the leader of the profession at the time, and was adopted as a truism by the entire profession. The outcome of this view, which has its followers even today, was several-fold, apart from the obvious blurring of profes- sional and clerical roles in Israeli libraries. The system of chartering librarians and non-academic forms of library training, already existing, received a new lease on life: the non-academic 231
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP courses were supposed to train people for chartering. This system, copied in form if not in contents, from the British model which, at the time, was already changing, was in part responsible for one characteristic of Israeli librarianship existing today. The great majority of Israeli libraries, public, school, or special (all admittedly small) were and still are run and staffed by people who may be chartered librarians, having had some training in librarianship, but who cannot be defined as professionals with appro- priate educational background or approach. Thus, the attempt to intro- duce general education into the non-academic forms of Israeli library education (the Danish model) was, at best, only partially successful. Another problem generated by chartering, a problem related to the patterns established in the thirties, is that key positions in I.L.A. are held by people who have had no library education. The outcome of this situation is the fact that the library association strongly opposes any attempts to upgrade non-academic forms of library education. In conclusion, it may be said that in library education, as in many other respects, Israel is a laboratory where the interplay of different, and often contradictory social forces and diverse cultural traditions can be observed and, to some extent, tested. References 1. Asheim, L.: Trends in Library Education - United States. Advances in Librarianship, 5: 147-201, 1975. 2. Cipolla, CM.: Literacy and Development in the West. Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 1969, p. 43, 101. 3. Katz, E., and Adoni, H.: Functions of the Book for Society and Self: A Study in Secular Transfor- mation. In: Yaron, K., ed. : Life-Long Education in Israel. Public Advisory Council of Adult Education at the Ministry of Education and Culture, and Adult Education Association of Israel, Jerusalem, pp. 50-60. 4. Asaf, S.: Sifriyat beit ha-midrash (The synagogue library). Y ad la-Kore, 1: 170-172, 1946-47. (Hebrew) 5. Haberman, A.M.: Toldot ha-Sefer ha-Ivri (History of the Hebrew Book). Jerusalem, R. Mass. 1945, pp. 10-13. (Hebrew) 6. Katz, I.: Masoret u-Mashber (Tradition and Crisis). Jerusalem, Mosad Bialik, 1958. (Hebrew) 7. Asheim, ref. 1, p. 160. 8. Wehmer, C: The Organization and Origins of German University Libraries. Library Trends, 12: 494-495, April 1964. 9. Ernestus, H.: German Public Libraries. Toronto, University of Toronto, 1972, pp. 5-6. 10. Rovelstad, M.V.: Socialistic Librarianship: Cuius regio eius bibliotheca. The Journal of Library History, 9: 318-333, 1974. 11. Denmark. State Inspection of Public Libraries. The Danish Public Libraries Act 1964. Copenhagen, 1977. 12. Sever, S.: Ha-sifriyot ha-tsiburiyot shel artsot Scandinavia (The public libraries of the Scandinavian countries). Yad la-Kore, 10: 85-96, 1969-70. (Hebrew) 1 3. United Nations. Department of Social Affairs. Monograph on Community Settlements and Report of the Survey Mission on Community Organization and Development: Israel. New York, United Nations, 1954, pp. 10-11,33. 14. Loewe, H.: Eine Judische Nationalbibliothek. Berlin, Jüdischer Verlag, 1905. 15. Ya'ari, A.: Beit ha-Sefarim ha-Leumi veha-Universitai b'Jerusalaim (The Jewish National and Univer- sity Library in Jerusalem). Tel-Aviv, Omanut, 1942, pp. 68-69. (Hebrew) 232
Library Education in Israel 16. Israel. Central Bureau of Statistics. Statistical Abstracto/ Israel. (No. 20.) Jerusalem, 1969, Table B/3, p. 22. 17. Bergmann, H.: Beit ha-Sefarim ha-Leumi veha-Univer sitai Bishnot 1920-1935. (The National and University Library in the years 1920-1935). Jerusalem, 1935, pp. 20-21. 18. Shunami, S.: Book review. Yod la-Kore, 18: 170-171, 1979. (Hebrew) 19. Bergmann, H.: Sifriot l'ladim (Libraries for children).//«/ ha-Khmuch, 1 : 155-156, 1927 (Hebrew) 20. Shunami, S.: Israel's Library Pioneer. Library Journal, 85: 4111-4113, 1960. 21. Bergmann, réf. 19. 22. Kahn-Eber, R.: Memorandum on the Reorganization of the Jewish National and University Library, Jerusalem, which took place in 1935. (Unpublished Report, 1938). (Excerpts in Hebrew published in Yad la-Kore, 16, 1977.) 23. Shunami, S.: Tape-recorded interview accorded to S. Sever on the mid-thirties administration of the Jewish National and University Library, 1978. (unpublished) 24. Weil, G.: Report on the Administration of the Jewish National and University Library, Jerusalem, for the Period of 3rd September 1930-30th September 1946. Jerusalem, 1947, p. 14. (Mimeographed) 25. Wormann, CD.: Education for Librarianship Abroad: Israel. Library Trends, 12: 211-226, 1963. 26. Carnovsky, L.: Report and Programme of Library Education in Israel. (Technical Assistance, Special Report, No. 1.). Paris, UNESCO, 1956, pp. 4-5. 27. Israel, ref. 16. 28. Sever, S.: Integration of Immigrants and Libraries in Israel, 1948-1960. Library Research, 1 : 67-82, 1979. 29. Wormann, ref. 25, pp. 214-215. 30. Wormann, CD.: Ba'ayot ha-sifriya be-Israel (Library problems in Israel). Yad la-Kore, 2: 2-16, 1950-51. (Hebrew) 31. Wormann, ref. 25, pp. 216-217. 32. Op. cit., p. 215. 33. Carnovsky, ref. 26, p. 3. 34. Wormann, ref. 25, p. 218. 35. Rothschild, Y.: Limudei "Musmakh be-Mada ha-Safranut" be-vet hasefer lesafranut shel ha- Universitah ha-Ivrit (Studies for the "Master in Library Science" at the Graduate Library School of the Hebrew University). Yad la-Kore, 12: 147-156, 1972. (Hebrew) 36. Wormann, ref. 25, p. 219. 37. Op. cit., p. 222. 38. Delougaz, N.: Library Training in Israel. UNESCO Bulletin for Libraries, 11: 82-83, 1957. 39. Wormann, ref. 25, p. 220. 40. Mersky, R.: Recommendations to the President of the Hebrew University. Jerusalem, 1973, p. 3. (Type- written copy) 4 1 . Ben-Nayem, V. , and Shavit, D. : Ha-sifriya ha-tsiburit be-Israel bi-rei ha-statistika (Public Libraries in Israel - a Statistical Survey). Yad la-Kore, 18: 12-24, 1979. (Hebrew) 42. Israeli Library Association. Duakh Irgun Safraney Israel - ASI (Report of the Israeli Library Association - I.L.A.). Yad la-Kore, 15: 13-16, 1976, (yellow pages). (Hebrew) 43. Shakhar, B. : Tarbut ve-Khinukh ba-Histadruth. (Culture and Education in the Histadruth). Tel- Aviv, Tarbut ve-Khinukh, 1975, pp. 126-128. (Hebrew) 44. Kleinberger, A. F.: Society, Schools and Progress in Israel. Oxford, Pereamon Press, 1969, pp. 51-81. 45. Mickman-Melkman, J.: Yikhudo v'ma'amado lelo orerin (His undisputed uniqueness and stature). In: Kaufer, Y., ed.: C.I. Golan -In Memoriam. Jerusalem, 1978, pp. 49-53. (Hebrew) 46. Barkay, M.Z.: Kavim le-toldot ASI (Development of the Israeli Library Association). Yad la-Kore, 12:2-16, 1971. (Hebrew) 47. Akzin, B.: The Academic World is Looking to the Future. Yediot Aharonot, August 8, 1971. (Hebrew) 48. Lebowitz, A.: L'sheelat mi hu safran (Reflections on non-academic library education). Yad la-Kore, 15: 153-155, 1976. (Hebrew) 49. Golan, C.I.: Mibeayoteiha shel ha-sifria ha-tsiburit be-Israel (Problems of the public library in Israel). Yad la-Kore, 10: 112-121; 190-197, 1969-1970. (Hebrew) 50. RothschUd, ref. 35, pp. 149-150. 51. Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Graduate Library School. Curriculum of Studies - 1978-79. (Mimeographed) 233
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP 52. Sever, S.: Hinukh safrani be-Israel: Beit ha-Sefer le-Safranut be-Universitat Haifa. (Library education in Israel: The Library School at the University of Haifa). Y ad la-Kore, 13: 154-157, 1973. (Hebrew) 53. Bar-Han University Programme of Studies for 1973/74. Ramat-Gan, 1973, pp. 197-205. 54. Schur, H.: Post-graduate Science Information Course in Israel. UNESCO Bulletin for Libraries, 24: 251-265, 1970. 55. Vilentchuk, L.: Training in Librarianship and Information Science in Israel. In: Vilentchuk, L., ed.: ISUC International Conference on Information Science, 1971, Proceedings, Tel Aviv, National Center of Scientific and Technological Information, 1972, pp. 481-490. 56. Sever, ref. 28. 57. Golan, C.I.: Speech. Quoted in: Rothschild, Y., Letter to the editor - Hakhsharat safranim - t'guvot (Education for librarianship - reactions). Y ad la-Kore, 16: 37-38, 1977. (Hebrew) 58. Israel Public Library Law. 1975. Clause 8. (Quoted in Y ad la-Kore, 15: 44-45, 1975.) 59. Heim, K.M.: Professional Education: Some Comparisons. In: Lee, J.M., and Hamilton, B.A., eds. As Much to Learn As to Teach - Essays in Honor of Lester Asheim. Hamden, CT, Linnet Books, 1979, pp. 128-176. 60. Carnovsky, ref. 26. 61. Wormann, ref. 25, p. 215. 234