Gorman's Gauntlet: Gender and Crying Wolf1 Christine Pawley The engagement of Andrew Dillon and April Norris with Michael Gorman's critique of library education is reminiscent of the medieval tour- nament. Through Gorman's "Whither Library Education," and the Dillon and Norris response "Crying Wolf," we, an audience of librarians and edu- cators, are treated to the spectacle of two powerful white men formally squaring off in a well-defined public space, each defending his own terri- tory, while attacking that of his opponent. Gorman (dean of Library Ser- vices at California State University, Fresno, and 2005-2006 president of the American Library Association) assumes the practitioner voice in speaking for "libraries," while Dillon (dean of the School of Information at the University of Texas at Austin and researcher in "human-computer in- teraction," and attended by his co-author, student April Norris, whom we might cast in the role of "squire") champions the academicians of library and information science (LIS), particularly those at research universities. This exchange joins a long line of publications that represent the field of LIS education as contested terrain. The arguments have a familiar ring; like the spectators to the joust, we recognize patterned moves, commonly ex- pressed as binary pairs - practice versus theory, the L-word versus the I-word, people versus technology, populism versus elitism. What is un- usual, though, is that here we see two men addressing an issue that in LIS previously has been raised almost entirely by women: that of gender.2 For Gorman this constitutes only one among fourteen points, but for Dillon and Norris it is one of three. By choosing to focus so particularly on gender, they help raise the consciousness of the LIS community to ongoing issues of equity and cultural climate. Most of "Crying Wolf's" explicit treatment of gender occurs in a section subtitled "Gendering the Instruction of Library or Information Science." However, the whole article adopts an implicitly gendered stance; as the simile of the tournament suggests, the very act of engaging in com- bat-through-publication has strongly gendered implications. Drawing on historian Suzanne Hildenbrand's work, Gorman refers to "a growing gen- der divide in LIS schools between 'information science' -oriented male teachers and library course-oriented females teachers." Gorman links this postulated divide to another social dimension: that of age. As "female li- brary-oriented teachers retire," he argues, "they are likely to be replaced by 'information science' -oriented teachers."3 Gorman fails to develop these J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 46, No. 4- Fall 2005 304 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2005 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Gorman's Gauntlet 305 About the Author Christine Pawley is an associate professor, School of Library and Information Science, and director, Center for the Book, The University of Iowa, (chris- tine-pawley @uiowa. edu). arguments, but Dillon and Norris devote about one-quarter of "Crying Wolf to elaborating and rebutting them. "While it is true that women's par- ticipation in library education has changed over time, and their faculty sta- tus and influence of education have seen periods of decline," they declare, "recent data may denote a movement away from the masculinization of fac- ulty and the gender stratification of faculty ranks."4 The issue of gender and LIS resonates with recent discussions in the pop- ular press about the relative under-representation of women in science and engineering. Dillon and Norris congratulate LIS on achieving a higher rate of female representation than other scientific and technical fields, and fo- cus much of their attention in attempting to show that "gender equality" in terms of "parity" already exists at least at the level of junior faculty hiring. But what kind of equality does parity in numbers hired represent? Librari- anship is a feminized profession in which about 85 percent of the practitio- ners are women.5 Yet positions of power - faculty positions and directorships of large libraries - have traditionally been disproportion- ately male; it is no accident that the major protagonists in this debate are both men.6 And what about other measures of equality - salaries, for in- stance? At all ranks the 2004 academic year salaries of men faculty out- stripped those of women, sometimes considerably.7 The "Crying Wolf numbers argument follows the tradition of the "pipe- line" theory commonly used to explain the under-representation of women in the sciences and engineering.8 According to this theory, few women work as professional or academic scientists because few girls go into sci- ence and math-related classes and programs. Raising the size of the origi- nal pool - increasing the numbers in the pipeline - would be one strategy to address the under-representation issue. However, leaks occur because women drop out of the pool. Numbers alone will not account for these leak- ages, but possible explanations can be found in a large literature that points to cultural and social factors influencing current contours of work and edu- cation.9 Emerging career patterns include two-career couples and greater mobility between careers; such social and cultural factors may affect women disproportionately. Consideration of these factors complicates the assumptions of the numbers approach. It is to their credit that Dillon and Norris have chosen to focus so much of their article on gender - a pervasive structuring force, though one rela- tively neglected in LIS. But by continuing to lean so heavily on an overly
306 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science simplistic quantitative method, they run the risk of actually perpetuating some of the ways in which gender continues to structure LIS education. Quantitative analysis is attractive because its results are often readily grasped and its "significance" easily demonstrated. Part of the allure also lies in the fact that the data may already exist, easily adoptable by research- ers like Dillon and Norris, anxious to respond in a timely manner to the challenge of a critic like Gorman. But data are often collected and dis- played by organizations (including ALISE and LIS schools) that are them- selves infused with thoroughly gendered ideologies that underlie assumptions, about for example, what should be included and what left out, what is important and what less so. The shape and pattern of these data in- here in a set of official texts that form part of the "ruling apparatus" of LIS, and that contribute to a narrative that LIS uses to present itself to itself, as well as to a wider world.10 Gendered ideologies lead people to assume that employment policies and procedures have no differential impact on women by comparison with men (or vice versa), that outcomes for men and women are the same. The ar- gument about the aging of LIS faculty assumes, for instance, that large numbers of both men and women will retire as they reach their mid-sixties. Yet women may actually retire in lower numbers than men at that age since their careers are more likely to have been interrupted by family responsibil- ities, and they may not have accumulated a large enough retirement fund to permit them to stop work at a conventional age.1 1 Where are the data about retirement funds? And what other kinds of differentials exist between men and women faculty other than rank and salary? What about the distribution of academic "goods" such as start-up funds, space, graduate assistance, and reduced teaching load? Who teaches the largest classes, and conversely, who teaches the doctoral seminars? The absence of data such as these in the ALISE statistical report testifies to underlying gendered assumptions about what needs to be reported. Answers to these questions could fill in some details of LIS career patterns, and might help explain - or re- fute - charges of gender inequality. Here we see the limitations of a broad-brush quantitative approach that leaves little room to account for complexities in the life and work situations of men and women LIS faculty who teach in different domains. Dillon and Norris go on to look at what they call "the magnitude of gen- der division within curricular offerings." Claiming to follow "conventional assumptions" reported by Hildenbrand, they note that they "sampled and evaluated the male to female ratio of a collection of courses categorized as either male or female in their orientation." The phrasing used here is of par- ticular note. In fact, neither Gorman nor Hildenbrand argue that courses per se are gendered, but rather point to the probability of certain kinds of courses being taught by men on the one hand, or by women on the other. This is a quite different proposition from suggesting that the courses them- selves can be described as either "male" or "female," or that courses can be "gender-oriented." Dillon and Norris go even further when they refer to
Gorman's Gauntlet 307 "classically defined female courses" and "classically defined male courses." Here, "conventional assumptions" have mutated into the even stronger "classic definitions," implying that such course characterizations are not only common today, but are of long standing. What does it mean to claim that a course (rather than its instructor) is "fe- male" or "male," and what can we infer from this slippage about these au- thors' understanding of gender as an axis of social analysis? First, it is important to remember the strongest historical association between gender and the library science curriculum is between women instructors and chil- dren's literature and services. Until mergers with information science ac- celerated during the 1 980s, all the other courses that Dillon and Norris now associate predominantly with women were mostly taught by men - who as late as the 1970s outnumbered women faculty by two to one. Indeed, refer- ence (gendered female, according to Dillon and Norris) has historically been an area of considerable prestige on which many men have centered their careers, in contrast to that other core library activity: cataloging. n The claim to "classic definition" (and even to "conventional assumption") is more than a considerable over-statement - it is actually misleading, and demonstrates both an ignorance of LIS history and an ahistorical under- standing of the operation of gender as a diachronic social dimension. Second, the transference of the qualifiers "male" and "female" to the courses themselves allows Dillon and Norris to sidestep (perhaps unwit- tingly) a real underlying difference between "L" courses and "I" courses - that they are stratified by status in accordance with a long-term effort by LIS faculty to present their field as scientific in nature, and thus worthy of higher prestige, power and access to material resources than fields in the arts and humanities (a project that long predated the introduc- tion of information science). Perhaps library science faculty welcomed in- formation scientists in increased numbers into their ranks in the late 1 970s and early 1980s at least in part because they believe this would boost their claims to scientific status as well as increase their size, and help fend off the threat of school closing that was a nightmarish reality for fifteen schools between 1978 and 1991.13 The introduction of more courses in information science - its reliance on quantitative methods apparently imbuing it with greater scientific authenticity - meant that library science courses (like ref- erence) that previously occupied positions near the top of the status ladder found themselves pushed down a few rungs. The operation of this status differential, combined with the possibility that women may feel that they have no choice but to accept lower status course assignments along with lower pay and adjunct work - could be a far more powerful explanation of the distribution of courses by gender than any supposed "male" or "female" characterization of content. Paradoxically in view of their modernist, progressivist language, Dillon and Norris - like Gorman - adopt a quite traditional view of the library and information field.14 This is the notion that "useful information"-an undif- ferentiated commodity that can be quantified, stored, and retrieved - is
308 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science what counts in LIS.15 Thus they fall prey to what Wayne A. Wiegand de- scribes as "tunnel vision and blind spots," and ignore the fact that the ma- jority of public library patrons - millions of them every year - go to the library to check out cultural products, including books that they then take home and read.16 Nowhere in either of these articles do the contenders con- sider that reading is central to what libraries do, far less that it should take a central place in the LIS curriculum of schools. Can one of the reasons for this view have something to do with the fact that there is a long-standing perception that it is primarily women and children who use the public li- brary in this way?17 And what of a related argument - one that rarely re- ceives attention in LIS literature - that reading is itself a highly gendered activity, with boys far more likely than girls to "fall behind" in reading?18 The absence of reading studies from the LIS curriculum is attributable, at least in part, to the conferring of higher status on science and technol- ogy-oriented courses, and a consequently lesser value on humanities-ori- ented courses. Lastly, talk of "female courses" and "male courses" promotes the notion that there is something inherently gendered about these courses - some- thing intrinsically male about information science courses like text re- trieval and database design, and something intrinsically female about library science courses like collection management and reference. This thinking betrays a form of essentialism - the belief that gender is a fixed and natural property (rather than a form of social relationship continuously historically negotiated and renegotiated) and that it can inhere not only in people but also in cultural and social products like academic courses. It's hard to believe that either these authors or their readers actually think of courses as inherently male or female. But this imprecise use of language suggests that in their haste to take up Gorman's gauntlet, Dillon and Norris have opened their arguments to precisely the same accusations of poor quality that they themselves level against research in LIS in general.19 Language matters. As Rosalind Williams comments, "The ideology of technological change is full of tough-guy rhetoric about the need to stay out in front, to beat the competition, to work 24/7 to keep ahead in a brutal envi- ronment. Not a world for girls. Of course, no one ever says directly that women are excluded from technological innovation, but the emphasis on the constant, brutal demands of the high-tech workplace implies once again that they have to make a choice between work and family."20 Such lan- guage - endemic in technical fields - when imported into LIS constrains men and women to conform to a muscular high-tech stereotype.21 At the same time other language works to exclude men from LIS domains associ- ated with women, like children's literature and services. Far more difficult for many in LIS to imagine than the female instructor of information sci- ence is the male instructor of children's literature. Perhaps a more telling index of gender "parity" than the proportion of women teaching informa- tion science courses might be the proportion of men teaching courses on working with children.
Gorman's Gauntlet 309 It seems evident that the participants in this joust, like many librarians and LIS faculty members, fail to see gender in relational terms as the opera- tion of ongoing social relationships. Instead they reductively equate it with a male-female dichotomy embodied in biological difference. To some ex- tent this is a result of the disciplinary insularity of which Dillon and Norris themselves complain. During the last quarter of the twentieth century, so- cial analysts have come to recognize that gender is not "about" women, or even about men and women, but rather that it represents a set of social rela- tionships (along with class and race), a mode "through which relations of power are claimed and constructed," in the words of historian Linda Kerber.22 Yet most LIS faculty members (with some notable exceptions, in- cluding Suzanne Hildenbrand herself) show little awareness of the very large body of scholarship that has stemmed from this fundamental concep- tual breakthrough.23 In their eagerness to take up the Gorman challenge, Dillon and Norris (like Gorman himself) tend to adopt combative and polarizing language ap- propriate to the tournament, but perhaps less productive in the real world. Their article demonstrates a need for more research, as well as for truly "gender-oriented" classes in the LIS curriculum - classes that acquaint students and faculty with recent theoretical perspectives and research on gender. "The technological turn" was not the only cause of intellectual up- heaval in the field of LIS in the 1 980s. Noticed by far fewer LIS commenta- tors, but arguably as cataclysmic in its implications, the interpretive revolution associated with postmodern theory that had influenced the so- cial sciences and humanities since at least the late 1960s finally began to have an impact on LIS by the early 1990s. This movement emphasized the search for meaning as opposed to causal factors, and coincided with a new awareness of gender, class, and race, spurred by the civil rights and feminist movements that also dated back to the 1960s and 1970s. Belat- edly, a new focus on "diversity" began to make the overwhelmingly white male composition of university faculty an embarrassment on many cam- puses. Reflection on this genuine revolution in LIS is sorely lacking, an absence that reinforces the view that the only real revolution has been a technologi- cal one, and forestalls consideration of the fundamentally gendered nature of the profession and its education. Dillon and Norris deserve congratula- tions for taking on the complex topic of gender. Now their article should spur us - librarians and LIS faculty - to a level of analysis that is both more nuanced and theoretically aware. An extensive literature analyzes gender and technological innovation, one that information scientists (especially those concerned with "human factors") as well as those who study libraries would do well to explore.24 The tournament - the ritualized debate in print - plays a useful function in gaining our attention. But just as in medi- eval times, the real action lies elsewhere; only by purposefully redirecting our attention as well as reframing our language can we address issues of gender equity effectively.
3 1 0 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science References and Notes 1. Many thanks to Stephanie Gowler and Alice Pawley for their help in preparing this re- sponse. 2. Since at least the 1 970s, sociologists, historians, and other scholars have distinguished be- tween biological understandings of sex (males and females distinguished by reproductive organs) and social constructions of sex - masculine and feminine roles and attributes con- tingent upon historical, social, and cultural circumstances. In social analyses, gender refers to the latter. 3. Michael Gorman, "Whither Library Education?" New Library World 105 (2004): 377. 4. This issue, 287. 5. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2003 84.4% of librarians in the United States were women ("No. 597: Employed Civilians by Occupation, Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin: 2003." U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2004-2005, http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-04.html.) 6. Women now occupy slightly more directorships of large academic libraries than men, but as a proportion of the total numbers of women and men in the field as a whole, women still lag far behind men. Marta Mestrovic Deyrup, "Is the Revolution Over? Gender, Economic and Professional Parity in Academic Library Leadership Positions," College and Research Libraries 65, (May 2004): 242-250. 7. This is true also of the new assistant professors for whom Dillon and Norris claim that gen- der parity has been achieved. Library and Information Science Education 2004 Statistical Report (Oak Ridge, Tenn.: AUSE, 2005), 14, 19. 8. Sue E. Berryman, Who Will Do Science? Minority and Female Attainment of Science and Mathematics Degrees: Trends and Causes (New York: Rockefeller Foundation, 1983). 9. Many commentators have pointed to the ways in which employment affects men and women differently. See, for instance, Arlie Russell Hochschild, The Second Shift (New York: Penguin, 2003), Molly McKaughan, The Biological Clock: Reconciling Careers and Motherhood in the 1980s (New York: Doubleday, 1 987), and Lisa R. Silberstein, Dual-Ca- reer Marriage: A System in Transition (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992). 10. "Ruling apparatus" is sociologist Dorothy Smith's term. See Dorothy E. Smith, Texts, Facts, and Femininity: Exploring the Relations of Ruling (London: Routledge, 1 990), 2 1 4. The curricula of LIS schools provide an example of "official texts." As a component of LIS classes, gender still plays a relatively small role - see note 16. 1 1 . Thus policies requiring employees to retire at a particular age - say sixty-five - discrimi- nate on grounds of sex as well as age. For ways in which retirement policies impact men and women differently (are gendered), see Nancy Dailey, When Baby Boom Women Retire (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998), especially chapter 5, "Retirement Income for Women," 79-111. 1 2. For a revealing discussion about the status of reference, cataloging and other library skills and activities relative to each other and to work in information technology, see Michael Stephen Ray, "Shifting Sands: The Jurisdiction of Librarians in Scholarly Communica- tion" (Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Arizona, 1 999), especially 1 60, 1 69, and 1 75-1 77. 13. Margaret F. Stieg, Change and Challenge in Library and Information Science Education (Chicago and London: American Library Association, 1992), 28-29. It was in 1983 that the Association of American Library Schools changed its name to the Association for Edu- cation in Library and Information Science Education (Charles D. Patterson, "What's in a Name," Journal of Education for Librarianship 23 (Springl983), 251-2). By 1985, forty-two out of seventy-six American schools and programs that offered courses in librari- anship had the word "information" in their title (Josephine Riss Fang and Paul Nauta, eds., International Guide to Library and Information Science Education (Miinchen: KG Saur, 1985).
Gorman's Gauntlet 31 1 14. For example, "the Internet has given rise to easy access to previously unimaginable amounts of information from one's own location . . . cheap widely available information and communication technologies are used by everyone across multiple task domains." (p. 294) Such Utopian claims to universality (just who is everyone?) should raise red flags for every thoughtful reader. 1 5. For an elaboration of this idea see Christine Pawley, "Information Literacy: A Contradic- tory Coupling," Library Quarterly 73 (2003): 422^52. 16. Wayne A. Wiegand, "Tunnel Vision and Blind Spots: What the Past Tells Us About the Present; Reflections on the Twentieth-Century History of American Librarianship," Li- brary Quarterly 69 (January 1999): 1-32. 1 7. See, for instance, Bernard Berelson, The Library fs Public: A Report of the Public Library Inquiry (New York: Columbia University Press, 1949), 30. 18. Donna Lester Taylor, "'Not Just Boring Stories': Reconsidering the Gender Gap for Boys," Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy 48 (December 2004/January 2005): 290-298. 1 9. See, for example, p. 295. 20. Rosalind Williams, Retooling: A Historian Confronts Technological Change (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003), 209. 21. An influential figure who consistently stresses the value of masculine while disparaging feminine imagery and language is Blaise Cronin, dean of the School of Library and Infor- mation Science at Indiana University, Bloomington, who, for example, uses words like "gushing," "shrill," and "irrational" to pour scorn on his (often but not always female) op- ponents, while endorsing "bullish" and "aggressive" responses, aspiration to "best of breed" status, imitation of the "corporate world" and adoption of "business values." See Blaise Cronin, "Shibboleth and Substance in North American Library and Information Science Education," Libri 45 (March 1995): 45-63. 22. Linda K. Kerber, Toward an Intellectual History of Women (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1 997), 3 1 3. For a helpful overview of gender theory construction see also Joan W. Scott, "Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis," American Histori- cal Review 91 (1986): 1953-75. 23. The LIS field's general lack of awareness of gender issues can be gauged by the fact that the term "Gender" only appears in the controlled vocabulary of the index Library Literature and Information Science in connection with "Reproduction" (two articles)! A search for peer-reviewed articles with the term "Gender" in any field in Library Literature and Infor- mation Science in September 2005 produced only 1 1 2 articles - most of these having noth- ing to do with LIS education. Articles that address gender issues are often indexed in a way that links them to women, but not to men, and are also far from numerous. For instance, a search for peer-reviewed articles indexed under "Feminism" produced thirty-seven arti- cles, and "Computers and Women" thirty-five, but "Computers and Men" is not a subject term. 24. See, for instance, Ruth Schwartz Cowan, A Social History of American Technology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997); Sally L. Hacker, Pleasure, Power and Technology: Some Tales of Gender, Engineering, and the Cooperative Workplace, (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989); Sally Hacker, Dorothy E. Smith, and Susan M. Turner, eds., "Doing it the Hard Way": Investigations of Gender and Technology (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1990); Ruth Oldenziel, Making Technology Masculine: Men, Women, and Modern Machines in America, 1870-1945 (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 1999); Nina Lerman, Ruth Oldenziel, and Arwen P. Mohun, eds., Gender and Technology: A Reader (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003); Joan Rothschild, ed. Machina Ex Dea: Femi- nist Perspectives on Technology (Elmsford: Pergamon Press, 1983); and Judy Wajcman, Feminism Confronts Technology, (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1991).