Integrating Research Results and National Board Certification Standards into a Leadership Curriculum for School Library Media Specialists Nancy Everhart and Eliza T. Dresang National guidelines and professional associations have recently focused on leadership as an essential action area for competent school library media spe- cialists. Although for many years at the Florida State University College of Information leadership had been incorporated into the curriculum for school media specialists, faculty, prompted by a university-wide leadership initia- tive and feedback from the field, decided to examine possible ways to inte- grate an even stronger leadership component. The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards tenets, which focus on encouraging organi- zational leadership, provided a natural foundation for curriculum development. Florida State University College of Information faculty systematically de- veloped a based-on-research leadership curriculum (Project LEAD) using a variety of formal and informal data sources. This research both validated and improved course content. Research findings substantively influenced the curriculum design that will produce school library media specialist leaders. Introduction The application of research to teaching and learning is a sound best practice in library and information science (LIS) education. Factors mitigating against this practice might be the 'inheritance' of course content, text- book-driven teaching, reliance on professor preference and perceived ex- pertise, lack of time and other resources, and tradition. The development of a graduate leadership certificate largely based on the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards tenets at the Florida State University Col- lege of Information provided the opportunity to apply research consciously and systematically to the development of curriculum without encountering the potential barriers. Grant support for increasing institutional capacity from the Institute of Museum and Library Services, Project LEAD: Lead- ers Educated to Make a Difference, gave faculty the time and resources to develop a based-on-research curriculum. The "newness" of the curriculum helped to free the process from time-honored expectations, i.e., from ex- J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 48, No. 4 - Fall 2007 272 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2007 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Integrating Research Results 273 About the Authors Nancy Everhart is the director of the School Library Media Program at Florida State University's College of Information and co-directs Project LEAD (everhart@ci.fsu.edu). Eliza T. Dresang is the Eliza Atkins Gleason Professor, College of Information, Florida State University (dresang@ci.fsu.edu). Ms. re- ceived 02/06; accepted 11/06; revised 11/06. pectations that school library media specialists need to know exactly what they have always needed to know. This research and funding led to the de- velopment of a 1 2-credit completely online leadership curriculum at the Florida State University College of Information offered as part of the mas- ter's degree, or a specialist's degree focused on leadership and the National Board, or as a stand-alone certificate. The curriculum consists of four courses, two of which are new courses, and two existing courses that have been enhanced. Leadership in Reading (new course), Leadership in Tech- nology (new course), Information Leadership and the Instructional Role of the Information Professional have had the research results consciously and systematically applied to their development. Each course, the assign- ments, and the pedagogy involved with them, are based on the analysis of the research and its resulting prominent themes of learning communities, collaboration, leadership, reading and appreciation of literature, technol- ogy integration, analytical and reflective practice, and race and ethnicity issues. Background Information Power1 identifies leadership as an essential action area for competent school library media specialists. For many years at the Florida State University College of Information leadership had been incorporated into the curriculum for school media specialists, faculty, prompted by a university-wide leadership initiative and feedback from the field, decided to examine possible ways to integrate an even stronger leadership compo- nent into the curriculum. The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards tenets, which focus on encouraging organizational leadership, provided a natural foundation for curriculum development. Research has shown that on average, National Board certified teachers are involved in ten leadership activities in their schools.2 Several studies identify the National Board process as being responsible for improving the quality of teaching as well as student performance.34 So a second goal of the new curriculum was to prepare interested media specialists to demonstrate their leadership through National Board Certification. National Board Certification, a voluntary process, is overseen by the Na- tional Board for Professional Teaching Standards, a non-profit, non-parti- san organization, and is the highest credential in the teaching profession. With the financial backing of the Carnegie Foundation and the National
274 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Science Foundations, the major teachers' unions, and the U.S. Department of Education, National Board Certification was created in the wake of a Carnegie Foundation report5 on the dismal state of U.S. education. Na- tional Board Certification is achieved through a rigorous perfor- mance-based assessment, based on five core-teaching propositions and ten subject-based standards. To qualify, candidates must hold a state license, have at least three years of certified experience, pass a standardized ETS-developed subject area assessment, and develop a four-part portfolio that includes videotaped interactions with students and extensive docu- mentation of organizational leadership. Portfolio entries in Library Media are comprised of Appreciation of Literature, Collaboration, Integration of Technology, and Documented Accomplishments. Many benefits exist for those who achieve National Board Certification. The process itself is a type of leadership training. At least thirty-two states, now accept the certification.6 All fifty states and more than 544 school dis- tricts have implemented policies and regulations to recruit, reward and re- tain National Board certified educators. For example, Florida pays 90% of the $2300 certification fee and successful candidates receive a 10% salary increase for ten years. A few states, e.g., Georgia, reward only National Board certified teachers in low-income schools. Research Questions The following research questions form a framework for the curriculum de- velopment discussed in this paper: • How does systematic, in-depth research make a difference in course development? • To what extent will it validate what faculty would have done without it and to what extent does it change what would have been done? • Is there a need for leadership courses based on National Board tenets? Methods and Procedures Both informal and formal data sources inform the teaching and learning in the Project LEAD curriculum. A carefully planned needs assessment was organized to make use of these sources. A basic assumption underlying our data collection and analysis is that improving performance on the National Board Certification process will enhance leadership performance. With this assumption, while we did consult more general research literature, our data sources were chiefly published or unpublished print and electronic documents related to the National Board or queries addressed to persons associated with the National Board standards, process, and results. Documents Existing Research and Statistics Since there have been no research studies of National Board certified li-
Integrating Research Results 275 brary media specialists or related pedagogy and curricula to date, closely allied research was used to inform the curriculum. Furthermore, most re- search studies focused on library media specialists as leaders are based on the perceptions of others rather than the actions of the library media spe- cialist, so these studies were not deemed directly useful. The most directly related research, approximately thirty studies,7 has examined the impact of National Board certification on teacher development and student achieve- ment with generally positive findings in both areas. For example, research has shown that successfully completing the process for National Board Certification improves the quality of teaching8 and makes teachers feel more confident in their abilities9 and that students of National Board Certi- fied teachers demonstrate increases in their standardized test scores10 and are engaged in more meaningful tasks in the classroom.11 Gathering some very elemental statistics on the status of library media candidates in relation to the National Board is facilitated by information available at the National Board Web site, which contains a searchable di- rectory categorized by each candidate's name, state, city, school district, certificate, and year the candidate achieved certification, as well as the number of successful candidates by state.12 Other background data has been gathered from various publications that specifically address National Board certified school media specialists131415 or teachers1617 and the Na- tional Board standards.18 Electronic Discussion Groups Both authors belong to the National Board for Professional Teaching Stan- dards electronic discussion group.19 Needs assessment data from both suc- cessful and unsuccessful candidates was gathered informally from participating in this group, particularly just after the passes/failures were announced in the spring. LM_NET20 is also a valuable resource as National Board candidacy and strategies for achieving certification often comes up in discussions. Web-based Survey A major means of determining what types of supports are valued by Na- tional Board candidates comes from a survey administered by the authors. The National Board Web site provides emails for 353 of the 1353 success- ful candidates. These candidates constituted the sample for the needs as- sessment survey. After Institutional Review Board approval, these media specialists were contacted and asked to participate in a Web-based survey developed using Snap Survey Software. The survey instrument was adapted with permission from a study of National Board teacher candi- dates21 and assesses what was most helpful to these candidates and what was missing from their support mechanisms during the process of prepar- ing for the exam and constructing their portfolio. The return rate was just over 30%. Data was imported into SPSS® and analyzed. This sample may or may not be representative of the population of successful library media
276 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science candidates, but it does provide some insights into what helped or hindered those who chose to respond. Interviews A National Board media specialist interviewed five unsuccessful candi- dates in the local school district (unsuccessful candidates are not identified by the National Board). Two methods were used to elicit feedback: (1) A list of twelve items that would be the most helpful to a candidate to rate 1-10 and (2) open-ended questions, administered and recorded orally. The remarks were aggregated without any identifying information and N6 soft- ware used for analysis of this data. Advisory Boards Agenda items for the Local and National Advisory Boards for Project LEAD are carefully constructed. Detailed notes were kept of meetings by a recorder and systematically analyzed for relevant content. Members of the Local Advisory Board, which meets monthly, include Florida State Univer- sity Deans and Directors, the Director of one of the five National Board Teacher Resource Centers located at Florida A&M, an historically black university in Tallahassee, a National Board certified media specialist, and one doctoral, specialist and master's student involved with the project. The Local Advisory Board contributes to addressing state guidelines within the course content and overall curriculum design. The student participants also are instrumental in formative evaluation of coursework in the pilot phase. Members of the National Advisory Board which meets by conference call and at ALA quarterly, provide a wider perspective. It consists of repre- sentatives from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, Educational Testing Service, school library media faculty, the American Association of School Librarians, a Spectrum Scholar, and successful can- didates from other states. To date, these members have assisted in design- ing the curriculum to address a national audience, as well as issues of recruitment and research. All board members have had experience with the National Board process and have contributed valuable knowledge and expertise to the needs assessment. Analytical Discussion of Findings Seven prominent themes and several others items important to consider in the development of the program and curriculum were derived from data analysis. Learning Communities The significance of National Board learning communities emerged from various needs assessments. In the survey, 43.5% received help from Na- tional Board certified mentors in Library Media and 70.7% from mentors outside of Library Media. The support from Library Media mentors was
Integrating Research Results 277 deemed helpful by 100% of the respondents while 7.7% of the candidates who received it from outside-of- field mentors did not find it helpful. Assis- tance from peers also preparing for the exam was received by 5 1 . 1 % of the candidates and considered helpful by all but 6.5% while support from non-library media candidates was received by 45.7% and not deemed help- ful by 10.9%. One unsuccessful candidate reported that her out- side-of-field mentor "did not understand Library Media and had trouble helping me interpret what was needed." In the survey open-ended com- ments section, the most frequently repeated remark related to the value of online discussion groups, e.g., the Yahoo group for library media special- ists interested in National Board Certification and LMJSfET. One candi- date said, "Two people from the listserv read my entries and I read countless archived messages to clarify information." Another said, "The MOST helpful!" When the researchers monitored the National Board dis- cussion group, they discovered daily support occurred among the partici- pants. A study commissioned by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards found that 58% of National Board candidates surveyed reported peer support as very helpful and that "those who did work with other candidates clearly valued the collaboration".22 A Florida District Me- dia Supervisor reported that her three successful candidates had meet weekly during the process and declared the experience invaluable in pre- paring their portfolios. Collaboration The National Board requires a portfolio entry on Collaboration, docu- mented with a log that tracks the progress of two students during the in- structional unit and documentation that the collaboration occurred. Leadership in collaboration based on National Board tenets requires radi- cally revised practices for some media specialists, who view it as a one-time appointment, usually to suggest resources, rather than a continu- ous, permeating process. In the informal needs assessment with unsuccess- ful candidates, when asked to rate twelve items on a scale of 1-10 according to their perceived helpfulness in preparing for the National Board, collaboration received a mean score of 8.75, the highest mean, tied only with meaningful technology integration. One candidate suggested the need for help on how to proceed in a school in which collaboration was not valued. Leadership Candidates are required to demonstrate leadership throughout the National Board process, but most specifically in the fourth portfolio item, Docu- mented Accomplishments. In this entry, accomplished media specialists show how their leadership in the school, the professional arena, and the community has impacted positively on student learning.23 Previous re- search24 has shown that media specialists are not viewed as leaders by themselves and others. Listserv postings and National Advisory Board in-
278 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science put confirm that this is a challenging area, particularly that of demonstrat- ing community involvement. No questions about leadership were included on the national or local surveys and interviews. Reading and Appreciation of Literature One of the more surprising results of the needs assessment was the ex- pressed need for help with teaching literature appreciation. One candidate interviewed noted new media specialists must have knowledge of how to teach both reading and literature appreciation. On the items deemed impor- tant in designing college courses, the interviewees gave 'fostering literary appreciation' the third highest score. The strongest emphasis on adding more on the teaching of reading came from the Local and National Project LEAD Advisory Board members who emphasized the collaborative teaching of reading as essential to meet state instructional standards. The state consultant for library media programs emphasized the need for media specialists to link their traditional expertise in selection and collection development to incorporate knowledge of and correlation with classroom reading instruction and assessment. Advisory Board members also stressed the need for more instruction in electronic reading programs and their impact, and on digital libraries. Strategies for reading motivation for secondary students, who increasingly leave reading behind, was another area targeted for more curricular leadership from media specialists. Technology Integration In portfolio entry three: Integration of Technology, "the emphasis of the en- try is on the use of technology to support instruction, not instruction to sup- port the use of technology. This is an extremely important distinction for candidates to make" (p. 132).25 According to feedback from our National Board Certified teacher consultant, who serves a mentor to media specialist candidates, "They tell me they will do a PowerPoint lesson for this entry. But when I ask them why are they doing a PowerPoint - how does that sup- port the objective of the lesson - they cannot articulate it." The survey re- sults may offer an explanation to this misconception as 62% of candidates felt they did not have to improve their technology skills, but 43% felt they needed knowledge of instructional techniques and pedagogy. Among the local candidates interviewed, instruction on technology integration re- ceived a mean score of 8.5 in usefulness in a college course. Analytical and Reflective Practice School library media specialists, once on the job may get involved in the daily responsibilities that are required and often do not take the time to re- flect on their teaching and the effectiveness of their programs. On the sur- vey, 65% of the respondents felt they needed to improve their writing skills, which are a major component of the National Board process. One criticism of the National Board process is that it is a writing test.26 Many candidates who fail the first time attribute it to weaknesses in analysis and reflection
Integrating Research Results 279 and with proper support in this area, often achieve certification in subse- quent tries. Race/Ethnicity Issues No publicly available data exists on the percentage of minorities taking the National Board in Library Media, or on the majority /minority pass rate. A National Board sponsored research study, "Exploring Differences in Mi- nority and Majority Teachers' Decisions about and Preparation for NBPTS Certification" provides data for other National Board areas.27 This study documents that "although African- American and Hispanic teachers come into the NBC candidacy pool in numbers proportional to their representa- tion in the U.S. teaching force, they earn certification at much lower rates" (p. 29).28 Results showed possible inequities in the support that minorities received. The study found, also, that minorities relied to a greater extent than majority teachers on mentor support. Discrepancies in behavior and discipline in classrooms were reported as a possible factor for lack of suc- cess (p. 29).29 The state consultant for library media and the Director of the National Board Teacher Resource Center at Florida A&M, an historically black college, both Local Advisory Board members, recommend the Na- tional board process as a pathway for teachers and media specialists to pro- vide leadership that will make a difference in their students' learning. The authors' needs assessment respondents were 90.2% white, 5.4% His- panic, 2.2% Black, and 1.1% Asian with 1.1% not responding. In this non-randomized study, minorities represent just slightly more than one-third of their proportion of the U.S. population. Interestingly, on the survey, only 5.4% of the candidates agreed that they would have benefited from working with other candidates who were of their own race/ethnicity and only 6.5% said they would have benefited from having an instructor of their race/ethnicity. Other Factors from Needs Assessment A variety of other factors arose from the needs assessment that is being ad- dressed in the Project LEAD curriculum. Initial findings seem to indicate that successful candidates do well with time management and unsuccessful candidates have difficulty distributing the intense workload required over time as well as balancing current job and family responsibilities. Since the majority of candidates are middle-aged, and have been out of the college classroom for decades, they do not have experience in portfolio develop- ment, which is now routinely required of new teacher candidates. When asked what was most difficult, one candidate said, "The portfolio, hands down." Other pedagogical issues that candidates noted as being potentially helpful are train the trainer techniques, assessing and meeting the learning styles of students, and classroom management techniques. Conclusions The authors' investigative research substantiated the need for the type of
280 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science curriculum proposed and the usefulness of applying research in curriculum development. It was determined from the data that: • Research both validates and improves course content and development; • Courses are substantially different from what they would have been without conducting the research; and • A need does exist for graduate level courses in leadership based on National Board tenets. The majority of the candidates surveyed said they had not taken col- lege/university classes that prepared them for the process of National Board Certification; 67.4% said they had not experienced a class that re- quired tasks like those on National Board, and only 3% had taken a univer- sity class designed to help with the National Board. This information juxtaposed with the report that mentor and peer support were most helpful when coming from someone in the library media field, and numerous other needs assessments responses, encouraged the authors to proceed with the planned curriculum. The analysis and application of the needs assessment led to the develop- ment of a 12-credit completely online leadership curriculum at the Florida State University College of Information offered as part of the master's de- gree, or a specialist's degree focused on leadership and the National Board, or as a stand-alone certificate. This curriculum consists of four courses, two of which are new courses, and two existing courses that have been en- hanced. Leadership in Reading (new course), Leadership in Technology (new course), Information Leadership and the Instructional Role of the In- formation Professional have had the research results consciously and sys- tematically applied to their development. Each course, the assignments, and the pedagogy involved with them, are based on the analysis of the research. Course Content Leadership in Reading was built entirely on topics suggested and research consulted during the needs assessment. Here is an excerpt from the course description . . . Special focus is placed on how reading for achievement, including reading assess- ment, and reading motivation, including enrichment, can be successfully reconciled as essential components of information literacy. . . . How information professionals meet the needs of individual learners/readers and of students from diverse cultural backgrounds is incorporated. Leadership in the application of electronic resources and digital libraries to enhance appreciation of literature is also included. An effort is made in this course and all others to incorporate diversity and eliminate any possible unwanted bias. Attention is paid on requirements for Portfolio Entry One, Appreciation of Literature, with a focus on the strategies for interacting with students around literary selections. Leadership in Technology addresses the prominent theme of integration that resonates throughout the National Board assessment for school library
Integrating Research Results 281 media specialists. Students in this course learn to use technology to support their own teaching, and also how to serve as instructional leaders to other teachers in their schools in this role. Practice and reflection is provided on portfolio entry three, Integration of Technology. Information Leadership has been extended to include more specific course content for school library media specialists and provides opportuni- ties for students to develop a personal leadership philosophy that will reso- nate throughout the National Board process. The Instructional Role of the Information Professional is naturally where the most intense emphasis on collaboration is placed. It is also the course where the most in-depth information is provided about learning styles. Enhancements include the opportunity for students taking the lead- ership certification to prepare a portfolio entry based on the instructions from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. In the first it- eration of this enhanced course, National Advisory Board members were asked to score the students' entries and to give them feedback. Course Pedagogy The pedagogy for these courses also grew out of the needs assessment/re- search. The National Board process provides a framework to change teach- ing, learning, and future professional practice. Assignments in the Project LEAD curriculum focus on students describing, analyzing, and reflecting on their own learning as a method of learning, rather than on rushing through one assignment and moving on to the next. As part of this process students form learning communities that support them in class and into their professional careers. Students become aware of the affective aspects of the National Board process as they learn from electronic discussions that articulate the successes and failures of fellow library media specialists. Those who have never seen themselves teach on video previously become skilled in their abilities, both pedagogically and technically, via this tech- nique. Strategies that have been demonstrated as effective for specific stu- dents, e.g., those from low-income backgrounds, are incorporated into course pedagogy.30 The authors, who teach the Project LEAD curriculum, have also learned from the process. They are making a conscious attempt to serve as models for their students by addressing the graduate students' varying learning styles and reflecting systematically on their own teaching. Recruitment and Tracking The findings on race/ethnicity point to the need to recruit a wide diversity of students into this graduate education through which candidates for the National Board receive specific support. Although not discussed in detail here, part of the Project LEAD commitment is to develop a recruitment plan that, among other objectives, will address this need. At the other end of the process, the authors are committed to tracking graduates of these pro- grams and determining whether the program's goal of 100% success on the
282 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science National Board Certification process is achieved and the extent to which participants become local and national leaders. Recommendations One result of this study is to demonstrate the need for academic research on National Board candidates in the field of Library Media. The needs assess- ment survey and interviews carried out as part of Project LEAD demon- strate that library media candidates have needs that differ to some extent from their classroom teacher peers. More needs to be known about unsuc- cessful candidates and what might have helped them succeed, in order to in- corporate this knowledge into course content. Another recommendation is for other LIS educators to examine their cur- riculum and perhaps to survey their students and alumni to ascertain the need for and interest in a curriculum such as that offered by Florida State. Due to its online nature, this curriculum is available anywhere that the Internet exists. However, the curriculum content is also available for other LIS schools to adopt if they have an appropriate clientele. A final recommendation is for all LIS educators to make a concerted ef- fort to base curriculum development on published and self-conducted re- search. The findings from this study substantially influenced the development of courses and headed them in a direction that will most likely best achieve desired learning outcomes while meeting learner needs. References 1 . American Association of School Librarians and Association for Educational Communica- tions and Technology, Information Power (Chicago: American Library Association, 1998). 2. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, "Accomplished Teachers Taking on New Leadership Roles in Schools," (2001), http://www.nbpts.org/research/archive_3. cfm?id=7 (accessed February 2, 2006). 3. Lloyd Bond, Tracy Smith, Wanda K. Baker, and John A. Hattie, The Certification System of the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards: A Construct and Consequen- tial Validity Study (Greensboro, NC: Center for Educational Research and Evaluation, 2000). 4. Dan Goldhaber and Emily Anthony, "Can Teacher Quality Be Effectively Assessed? ," Urban Institute (April 7, 2005), http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/ 410958_ NBPTSOutcomes.pdA (accessed February 1, 2006). 5. Carnegie Task Force on Teaching as a Profession, A Nation Prepared: Teachers for the 2 1st Century (Washington D.C.: Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy, 1986). 6. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, "State and Local Support and Incen- tives," (2004), http://www.nbpts.org/about/state.cfm (accessed February 2, 2006). 7. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, "National Board for Professional Teaching Standards: Studies, Reports & Papers," (January 6, 2006), http://www. nbpts.org/pdf/research/NBPTS_bibliography.pdf (accessed February 2, 2006). 8. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Research Department, Impact of NBPTS Certification on Teachers Who Earned National Board Certification (Arlington,
Integrating Research Results 283 VA: National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, May 2001), http://www. nbpts.org/pdf (accessed February 2, 2006). 9. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Research Department, I Am a Better Teacher - What Candidates for National Board Certification Say about the Assessment Process. A Sur\>ey of National Board Certified Teachers and Assessors (Arlington, VA: Na- tional Board for Professional Teaching Standards, November, 2001). 10. Leslie Vandervoort , Audrey Amrein-Beardsley, and David C. Berliner, "National Board Certified Teachers and their Students' Achievement," Education Policy Analysis 1 2, no. 46 (2004): 1^5 1 1 . Allan Morasch, "Evaluating the Impact of National Board Certification," (2004), http://www.cstp-wa.org/ Accomplishedteaching/Impact_studies/Moraschreport.pdf (ac- cessed February 2, 2006). 12. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, "NBCT Directory," (2006), httpV/www.nbpts.org/nbct/directory.cfm (accessed February 1 , 2006). 13. Gail Dickinson, Achieving National Board Certification for School Library Media Spe- cialists: A Study Guide (Chicago: American Library Association, 2006). 1 4. Gail Dickinson, Portfolio Guide for the School Library Media Specialist (Chicago: Ameri- can Association of School Librarians, 2004). 15. Peggy S. Milam, National Board Certification in Library Media: a Candidate's Journal (Worthington, OH: Linworth Publishing, 2005). 16. Kathleen Anderson Steeves and Barbra Cole Browne, Preparing Teachers for National Board Certification: A Facilitator's Guide (New York: Guilford Press, 2000). 17. Adrienne Mack-Kirshner, The National Board Certification Workbook Second Edition: How to Develop Your Portfolio and Prepare for the Assessment Exams (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2005). 18. National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, "NBPTS Certificate: Early Child- hood through Young Adulthood/Library Media Overview," (2006), http://www. nbpts.org/candidates/guide/whichcert/24EarlyChildYoungLibMedia2004. html (ac- cessed February 2, 2006). 19. Yahoo! Groups: librarymedia, (2006), http://groups.yahoo.coni/group/librarymedia/ (ac- cessed February 1 , 2006). 20. LM_NETt (2006), http://www.eduref.org/lm_net/ (accessed February 2, 2006). 21 . Karen Mitchell, Christopher Chang-Ross, Melanie Daniels, Kaeli Knowles, Tiffany Price, and Andrew Wayne, Exploring Differences in Minority and Majority Teachers' Decisions about and Preparation for NBPTS Certification (Arlington, VA: SRI International, 2004). 22. Ibid. 23. Dickinson, Achieving National Board Certification for School Library Media Specialists: A Study Guide. 24. Gary Hartzell, "The Invisible School Librarian: Why Other Educators Are Blind to Your Value " School Library Journal 43, no.l 1 (November 1997): 25-29. 25. Dickinson, Achieving National Board Certification for School Library Media Specialists: A Study Guide. 26. Robert Burroughs, Composing Standards and Composing Teachers: The Problem of Na- tional Board Certification, Journal of Teacher Education, 52 (3) (May-June 2001): 223-32. 27. Mitchell, Chang-Ross, Daniels, Knowles, Price, and Wayne, Differences in Minority and Majority Teachers' Decisions about and Preparation for NBPTS Certification. 28. Ibid. 29. Ibid. 30. Nancy Everhart and Toni Pearce-Web, "The School Library Media Specialist as a National Board Teacher Candidate in a Low-Performing School," Knowledge Quest 35, no. 3 (Janu- ary/February 2004): 40-42.