URBANIZING AMERICA: COSTS AND CHALLENGES' RAYMOND W. MACK H ISTORY is misleading. It is mis- leading because it is the written record left for us by those who had the leisure to leave us a written record. What do we think of when we hear the phrase "ancient Greece"? We envision a society of poets, sculptors, playwrights, and philosophers. But most ancient Greeks were slaves, sail- ors, farmers, and miners, on whose backs the small percentage of scholars and artists lived. What are our images of medieval Europe: knights and trou- badours? Most medieval Europeans were serfs (despite the evidence of Americans' genealogy charts). Only in the past century or two, with industrialization, have we been able to mass produce food, clothing, and shel- ter, and remove most citizens in indus- trial society from the obligations of their ancestors: directly to produce their own food, clothing, and shelter. This is a change we laud, but it brings with it related changes, some of which we call progress, some of which we call problems. THE COST AND CHALLENGE OF CHANGE An invention, a new idea, any alter- ation in the established order makes it necessary for people to learn new ways of responding to new situations. The tendency of most of us most of the time is to avoid this stress and strain. The history of science is accompanied by a history of reactions to scientific discoveries-and a frequent reaction is opposition to innovation. "Experts" are as capable of blind op- position to change as is anyone else. Doctors scoffed at the pioneer work of Louis Pasteur in bacteriology. U.S. naval officials were highly skeptical of John Ericsson's idea for a screw propel- ler. Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt, the railroad magnate, dismissed George Westinghouse and his air-brake inven- tion with the comment that he had no time to waste on fools. In 1906 the as- tronomer Simon Newcomb stated pub- licly that neither laws of physics nor the state of the industrial arts made it practicable for man to fly long distances through the air. Sometimes resistance to change is clearly based upon the protection of vested interests. The owners of canal barges and stagecoach lines vigorously opposed the construction of railroads. A century later the railroad unions were attempting to thwart the introduction of the Diesel locomotive because it threatened the firemen's jobs. But often simple fear of the unknown or reluctance to learn new patterns of behavior motivates a man to plump for the status quo. In the 1960's literate citizens in metropolitan suburbs hold mass meetings to prevent competent lo- cal health officers from adding to the communities' water supplies the small amount of fluoride necessary to reduce tooth decay among the towns' children. The system of staggering the time for school recess to allow more play space 'This paper draws upon material from my book, Transforming America: Patterns of Social Change (New York: Random House, 1967). 3
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY for the children had to be abandoned in one community because some par- ents who saw children on the play- ground all through the day spread the word that the newfangled plan meant no work and all play. Sociologists and psychologists have demonstrated time and again that am- biguity is a threat to security and emo- tional stability. People like to know what is expected of them. Uncertainty about the rules of the game makes peo- ple difficult to get along with; shifting standards of behavior make a man nervous. When, as in the southern United States, state law requires segre- gation of the races and federal law for- bids it, the resulting strain on individu- als and organizations provides fertile ground for the seeds of conflict. Indeed, when psychologists want, for experimental purposes, to turn a nor- mal little white rat into a neurotic one, they simply change the rules of every- day life for him until he goes to pieces. They first teach the rat that if he finds his way through a maze and trips a lever with his paw he will receive a piece of cheese. Then the psychologists change the path of the maze. When the rat takes what used to be the correct turn to reach the lever and the cheese, he bumps into a wall. Suppose the little fellow has sufficient emotional strength to sustain this frustration and learn the new maze. Then he finally arrives at the lever, presses it with his paw, and instead of cheese receives an electric shock. After enough such violations of what he has learned to expect as the normal operation of his world, a rat-even a hungry one-will lie at the beginning of the maze and stare. He will not even try to find the cheese. Change is painful, but nevertheless human beings are possessed of a certain amount of curiosity. A little boy who is not searching for anything in particular will peer into a hole just to see what's there. This human characteristic, curi- osity, sometimes has consequences that conflict with that other human tenden- cy, resistance to change. The curiosity that led one of our ancestors to experi- ment with fire resulted in thousands of his fellows' altering their whole way of life: cooking and preserving their food, abandoning a wandering hunter's exist- ence for life in settled communities, extending those settlements into colder climates, and eventually forging metal tools and weapons to replace crude stone implements. The questioning in- tellects of Copernicus and Galileo threw the solar system into a new perspective and forced men, in spite of their prefer- ence for traditional wisdom, to review their concepts, not only of physics and astronomy, but also of politics and re- ligion. Few examples of the mental an- guish inflicted upon men by science are more dramatic than the response of seventeenth-century thinkers to Coper- nicus' argument that the earth is not the center of the universe. Even today, many people resist the implications of Darwin's now century-old observations about natural selection and the process of evolution. It is painful to abandon a view of man as slightly lower than the angels in favor of one that places him slightly higher than the apes. Darwin, Copernicus, and the fire tamer are bold examples, but each little increment of knowledge unearthed by scientists and applied by engineers is apt to cause dislocations in the care- fully ordered existence of men. Guten- berg's movable type destroys the near- monopoly on written communication of the clergy and privileged classes. Tele-
URBANIZING AMERICA 5 vision causes a crisis in the movie in- dustry. The internal-combustion engine produces unemployment among buggy- whip makers. Home-permanent kits cause savings account withdrawals by beauticians. Oral contraceptives raise theological questions. The introduction of voting machines undermines careful- ly built metropolitan political organiza- tions. Where science and its applica- tions flourish, men, like the white rat in the maze, find the rules governing survival in a constant state of flux. THE CHANGING FABRIC OF SOCIETY: UR- BANIZATION AND INDUSTRIALIZATION Science produces change, and change is difficult to accept. Never in human history have men lived in a more diffi- cult century than this one. The rapid ur- banization of the world is made possible through scientifically produced technol- ogies, from death control through mod- ern methods of sanitation to the mass production of food on "factory farms." The striking growth of cities in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries has been a new experience in human his- tory. Worldwide urban expansion is bringing about great changes in the ma- jor patterns of social organization and culture. Although cities existed five or six thousand years ago, the cities of the an- cient world were generally small towns by modern standards. The largest of them contained only 1 or 2 per cent of the total population in their society, and Kingsley Davis estimates that it took from fifty to ninety farmers to produce the surplus needed to enable one man to live in an urban center. In fact, it is in the ratio of farmers to urban dwel- lers that the explanation can be found for the recency and suddenness of ur- banization. Not until the Industrial Revolution-with its factory system, improved farming techniques, and tre- mendous speedup in transportation of goods-was it possible for whole socie- ties to become urbanized. Technologi- cal advances diminish the need for farm laborers. One farm worker's labor fed seven people in 1900. By 1950, one farm worker's labor fed nearly sixteen people. The latter figure more than dou- bled in fifteen years: by 1965 one farm laborer fed thirty-three people. Only when one farmer can raise enough food for many people can a society exist where the majority of people live in cities. Only in the past century and a half has the world known truly urban socie- ties in which a high proportion of the total population lives in cities. As re- cently as 1800, only 2.4 per cent of the world's population lived in cities of 20,000 or more; today more than one- fifth of the people live in such cities. Furthermore, the proportion of people living in large cities has risen even more dramatically. By 1950 the proportion of people in the world living in cities was higher than that in even the most urbanized country in pre-industrial times. Between 1800 and 1850, the total population of the world increased only 29 per cent, but the population living in cities of 5,000 or more grew 175 per cent, that in cities of 20,000 or more by 132 per cent, and that in cities of 100,000 or more by 76 per cent. Then, from 1850 to 1900, the impact of scien- tific technology began to be felt in rap- id industrialization. During that period the total population of the world in- creased by 3 7 per cent. But, in the same span of time, cities of 5,000 or more in- creased by 192 per cent, those of 20,000 or more by 194 per cent, and those of
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 100,000 or more by 222 per cent. Dur- ing the next half-century, from 1900 to 1950, cities expanded at an even more accelerated rate. While the population of the world increased by 49 per cent, the three size categories of urban popu- lations grew 228, 240, and 254 per cent, respectively. If this trend continues at its present rate, more than a quarter of the world's people will be living in cities of 100,000 or more by the year 2000 and more than half by 2050. If the present rate of urbanization continues until the year 2050, more than 90 per cent of the world's people will live in cities of 20,000 or more. Today we have whole societies that can be called "urbanized." More than four-fifths of the people in England live in urban places; nearly 40 per cent of them live in cities of more than 100,000. In societies like our own, with radio, television, rapid transportation, and an industrial distribution system, what is a fad on Manhattan Island today is a fad in Manhattan, Kansas, tomorrow. The rate of change men have endured in the past one hundred years is un- paralleled in any previous time or place. The population of the world doubled between 1850 and 1930; at present rates of increase, it will double again between 1965 and 2000. The percen- tage of the world's population living in cities has more than doubled during the twentieth century; it has increased 500 per cent since 1850. Both the size of the American labor force and the pro- portion in clerical and professional jobs have doubled in a half-century, and the proportion of women in the labor force has nearly doubled. In 1900 there were only 238,000 students enrolled in col- leges and universities in the United States. By 1950 there were 2.6 million. At present there are more than 5.4 mil- lion; there was an increase of nearly 80 per cent in the 1950-60 decade alone. In Africa there were four inde- pendent nations in 1950; twenty-two new states emerged in the ensuing dec- ade. All these changes and many more -in population, migration, urbaniza- tion, the labor force, economic activity, education, and politics-are conse- quences, at least in part, of the discov- eries and uses of science. Small wonder that we have never be- fore experienced so much change so rapidly: Never before in human history have so many men devoted so much effort to scientific research. E. M. Pur- cell of Harvard estimates that 90 per cent of all the scientists who have ever lived are living today. We are investing more time, more energy, and more mon- ey in scientific activity than ever be- fore. About $2 billion was spent on sci- entific research and development in the United States in 1945. The figure has risen steadily ever since; by 1961 it was $14.5 billion. Federal expenditures for research have multiplied two hundred times in the past twenty-five years, from $74 million in 1940 to $15 billion in 1965. In such a context we can be certain of one thing: Change will continue to be rapid and far-reaching. As we have seen, swift and drastic change is unset- tling. It constitutes a threat to individ- ual security and to the stability of the social order. For example, I recently interviewed a woman who is a department store clerk in Chicago. She has customers she feels awkward in serving because they are wealthy, well-educated Negro women. She learned about Negroes from contact with cleaning women, as did most white Americans of her generation.
URBANIZING AMERICA 7 She has had no instruction in or prac- tice at dealing with Negro women who are the wives of insurance executives who make ten times as much money as she does. Rapid social change, such as that in American race relations, poses various problems for different people. I also in- terviewed, about three years ago in Alabama, a poor, rural, uneducated southern Negro. He provides a model of what social scientists mean when they use the term "role conflict." This man grew up in a different world-a related one, but a different one-from that of the department store clerk. He grew up in a world where there were two rules for survival: Don't make the white people mad; if in doubt, ask the minister. Having learned that two basic rules are (1) don't irritate the white man, and (2) lean on the minister for advice, that Negro man goes to church Sunday morning and hears the minister tell him: "It is your duty as a good Ameri- can citizen and as a Christian to do the following things, which are going to ir- ritate white people: Go out there and protest; go and demand your rights; stand in line to register to vote." The minister is telling him to do these things. The poor man knows only two rules, and they are coming into direct conflict. Social change is very hard on people because some of the rules they have learned no longer count-but they can- not always tell which ones they should abandon. Yet research also demon- strates that there is one way to mediate the threat, reduce anxiety, and over- come much human resistance to social change. Unlike the experimenters' white rats, human beings are able to learn to anticipate coping with situations they have not lived through. They are able, in other words, to un- derstand change if it is explained to them. They can be told, "Something you have never experienced before is going to happen, and here's what it will be like." And they can mentally prac- tice coping with it before it happens. Therefore they do not have to lie down at the beginning of the maze. The key lies in understanding. The solution is to remove people from the category of the frustrated white rat by explaining what is happening and why it is occurring. Many studies in indus- trial sociology conclude that new poli- cies and work patterns can be estab- lished with minimum personal insecu- rity and maximum ease of adjustment to change, if people are told what is happening and why. THE CHANGING SHAPE OF THE AMERICAN CLASS STRUCTURE Not only the composition of the la- bor force, but also its distribution among various occupational statuses, have changed markedly in the past few generations. At the time our country was founded, farming was the most im- portant income-producing activity of the people. And as recently as 1870, more than half the labor force was en- gaged in agriculture. Today farmers comprise only 6 per cent of the labor force. The major industrial change in the last century has been from the produc- tion of goods to the production of serv- ices. At the turn of the century, about three-fourths of the people in the labor force were engaged in producing physi- cal goods, and fewer than one-fourth provided services. By 1960 the major- ity of the people in the labor force worked in service occupations. These figures include employers and the self-
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY employed, as well as wage earners and salaried workers. This large-scale shift in the distribution of the labor force has been brought about largely by tech- nological improvements. Machines wash dishes, dig ditches, and even measure and make corrections in the quality of production by other machines. Heavy manual labor has given way to machine production, which has freed a larger portion of the labor force for work in service industries. It is not simply that automation has taken over many of the tasks formerly performed by human hands in manufacturing; agriculture, too, has become more and more mech- anized. There were 600,000 fewer farms in the United States in 1954 than in 1950. Despite the fact that there are now fewer farms than at any time since 1890, these farms are able, through mechanization, to supply a consider- ably greater population than could a larger number of smaller farms. In 1900, 37.5 per cent of all Americans at work were doing farm jobs. Today, only 6 per cent of our labor force works on farms-and these workers are able to produce surpluses. The trend toward mechanization of agriculture and man- ufacturing has meant that a larger and larger segment of the labor force is available to run laundromats, rent out evening clothes, provide package-deliv- ery services, be tree surgeons or public stenographers-in short, to enter serv- ice industries. This change in the industrial struc- ture from production to service is ac- companied, of course, by a change in the occupational distribution of the la- bor force. The most dramatic growth has occurred in semiskilled labor and the clerical occupations; the most strik- ing decline is in the unskilled segment of the labor force. The increase in cleri- cal and professional personnel is a corol- lary of the expansion of services; most of the people in both these categories are providing services. Since 1890, cler- ical workers in the labor force have in- creased fivefold, professional and tech- nical workers threefold, sales workers nearly twofold, and proprietors and managers by almost one-half. During the same period, household workers de- clined 50 per cent, but other service workers, like barbers, beauticians, cooks, firemen, janitors, policemen, and waitresses, have doubled. In general, the proportions in service occupations have increased by a third. The nation's economy, then, is less and less dependent on muscle power and more and more dependent on pro- fessional, technical, and clerical skills. The shift from brawn and manpower to education and brainpower summarizes a basic trend in American economic life. The growth of semiskilled labor at the expense of the unskilled is a func- tion of two changes in the industrial structure. First, of course, was the de- velopment of machinery that enables one semiskilled worker to perform the task formerly accomplished by several unskilled laborers. One crane operator, for example, can replace twenty men pushing wheelbarrows. The other change that helped to speed the mech- anization of industry was the success of the labor-union movement during the past three decades, which has made la- bor more expensive and thus has made it more profitable, for example, to hire one man and purchase a machine than to use three men and save the cost of the machine. Certainly the Industrial Revolution has brought drastic changes in produc- tion and consumption patterns. With 7
URBANIZING AMERICA 9 per cent of the world's land area and only 6 per cent of its population, the United States produces more than one- third of the world's goods. The average work week in the United States has been reduced by about one-third in this century, whereas production per man hour has tripled. During the past sixty years, family income has increased two and a half times in purchasing power. During the same period, the proportion of Americans who own their own homes has increased from one in three to three in five. Total personal income in the United States from all sources has risen stead- ily since 1950. The aggregate personal income of $228.5 billion in 1950 more than doubled to $530.7 billion by 1965. More important, there has been a con- tinuous rise in the amount available to spend. Personal disposable income of Americans more than doubled from $207.7 billion in 1950 to $465.3 billion in 1965. American society has experienced recently a remarkable redistribution of income. As the amount of education and the number of white-collar workers have increased, the pyramid of income has been altered. It is no longer a per- fect pyramid; indeed, it is becoming more and more diamond-shaped: In- stead of a few people who are very rich and many who are very poor, there are few at either pole. Most Americans fall near the middle of the income distribu- tion. In 1929, 87 per cent of American families had incomes of less than $5,000 a year. Look at what has happened during the ensuing thirty years. As recently as 1936, a diagram of the dis- tribution of income among American families would have been a pyramid. But during the 1940's, with the enor- mous demand for labor, service workers and manual laborers enjoyed increases of about 180 per cent. In the same decade, professionals and managers achieved relatively smaller increases, but they were the highest paid workers in the first place, and their incomes rose 96 per cent. During the 1950's the pat- tern of gains was reversed: the incomes of professionals and managers went up 68 per cent, whereas laborers and serv- ice workers received increases of 39 per cent. The diagram of family income dis- tribution in 1960 no longer even ap- proximates a pyramid. The category of people receiving incomes of less than $4,000-the vast majority of our popu- lation twenty-five years ago-had been reduced by two-thirds. This redistribu- tion trend has continued through the decade 1954-64. This change in the distribution of income subtly feeds back to alter the structure of the economy. For example, if a family earning $3,000 a year doubles its income, it does not double its expenditures for food and clothing. It may well reduce its expenditures for public transportation. It is more likely to increase its outlay for vacations or stockbrokers. The average American urban family, while experiencing a rise in income, reduces its proportional ex- penditures for food and clothing and increases its outlay for housing, auto- mobiles, and medical care. The redistri- bution of income in a society experienc- ing a science-based revolution in its industrial complex is a basic cause of the growth of the service sector of the economy. RACE AND CLASS Social change always presents prob- lems for individuals, and many Ameri-
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cans in the 1960's are more disturbed about desegregation than their grand- parents were about female suffrage. Some react against the idea of equality of treatment of people of all races with an emotional violence comparable to that which their ancestors displayed when faced with the idea that the sun rather than the earth was the center of the universe. Most Americans have grown up in a world that taught by example that white skin was the center of the universe. Re-evaluating such beliefs threatens emotional security. Things that used to be known for sure become uncertain- ties. How is a white clerk in an exclu- sive shop supposed to behave when faced with a wealthy Negro customer? In the world the clerk grew up in there were no wealthy Negroes (or so she had assumed). What is a Negro sharecrop- per supposed to do when his minister urges him to register and vote? His parents taught him to pay attention to trustworthy leaders like his minister and to avoid trouble with whites; now he cannot do both. When white Ameri- cans know as an article of faith that having Negroes move into a neighbor- hood lowers property values because Negroes are shiftless, dirty, and unedu- cated, what are those white suburban- ites to think when their new neighbor is neat, ambitious, a college graduate- and a Negro? The path to correct be- havior is no longer clear; social expecta- tions are ambiguous and poorly defined. And it is not just the fact of social change that makes life difficult; it is the rapid rate of that change. At present, the swift change in the social fabric wrought by desegregation seems to be concentrated in the South. This concentration makes change all the more difficult, for the South is char- acterized by the very elements that contribute most to resistance to change. The South remains predominantly agrarian, with a high birth rate and a low level of formal education. It is the most rural section of urban America, the least schooled region in a highly educated society, a relatively unindus- trialized portion of a technologically oriented nation. But it is shortsighted to think of desegregation as a problem that is es- sentially the South's. There it is focused and at present causes the most disrup- tion of living patterns. Remember that, fifty years ago, 90 per cent of all Ameri- can Negroes lived in the states of the old Confederacy. One measure of the swiftness of the change in the Negro's status is that half of the Negro popula- tion now lives in the cities of the North and West: New York City is now 14 per cent Negro, Chicago 24 per cent, Philadelphia 26 per cent, Detroit 29 per cent, and Newark 3 5 per cent. These tremendous migrations create problems at both ends of the line. Mis- sissippi lost one-fourth of its total Negro population in the 1940's, and, although some Mississippians may laughingly claim that migration prom- ises the ultimate solution of their prob- lem at the North's expense, they are mistaken. It is the Negroes Mississippi can least afford to keep who stay at home: Those most likely to migrate are the young people with better than aver- age education. And every year these people are packing into already over- crowded Negro ghettoes in the northern cities, their residential segregation in- suring segregation in schools and other facilities. A Negro boy in America today has about half the chance to complete high school that a white boy has; one-third
IJBANIZING AMERICA 11 the chance to complete college or be- come a professional man; one-seventh the chance of earning $10,000 a year; twice the chance of being unemployed. The average Negro college graduate will earn less in his lifetime than will the average white who never went be- yond the eighth grade. A Negro Ameri- can's life expectancy is seven years shorter than a white American's. In 1960 the median money wage was $3,058 for Negroes and $5,425 for whites. Only 39 per cent of white families earned less than $5,000; 71 per cent of Negro families had incomes below $5,000. And the relative gap be- tween Negro and white family income has been increasing since the mid-fifties. With perhaps intentional irony, President Johnson described the race- relations situation in the United States admirably in his report on the 115 companies participating in President Kennedy's "Plans for Progress" hiring program: "Within those companies whose reports have been received the ratio of white salaried employees to nonwhite dropped from 61 to 1 at the beginning of the reporting period to 60 to 1 at the end. We still have a long way to go." In one shameful sense the demands of the civil rights protest movement are revolutionary. The American Negro has been so disadvantaged economically and socially that a real attempt to bridge the gap would require a realloca- tion of resources that would indeed be revolutionary. The problem of desegregation be- longs to the whole country. The South at present is particularly vulnerable to rapid change, for the southern states depended for segregation on laws that have been declared unconstitutional. The North feels different pressures be- cause its segregation is accomplished informally through residential patterns and is harder to strike at through the courts. But race relations is not a south- ern problem; it is what Gunnar Myrdal called it: an American dilemma. The American stratification structure tolerated, within its open-class system, human slavery, which later, under mili- tary-political pressure, gave way to a semicaste system based on color. The persistence of the white-Negro caste relationship is not only a cultural para- dox but also continues to present the United States with one of its most serious and pressing local and national dilemmas. Throughout the United States, whites have been getting out of the bottom in- come bracket more rapidly than Ne- grots have, and a higher proportion of whites than of Negroes has been moving into the top income category. Further- more, the products of centuries of ra- cial discrimination appear in the rela- tionship between education and income. White Americans who have completed elementary school average higher life- time earnings than do Negro Americans who are college graduates. It is important to the maintenance of the American way of life that Americans implement their belief in equality of opportunity. The most effective way to insure this belief is to minimize the roadblocks of class status, race, and regional inequality and to make it pos- sible for each individual to go as far as his talents and drive will carry him. THE CHALLENGE OF FREEDOM Urban, industrial social structure is an enormous generator of social prob- lems in contemporary America-nat- urally, for urbanism and industrialism are central characteristics of American
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY society. Urbanization and industrializa- tion in the United States provide a set- ting for and contribute to a host of problems: miles of decaying slum tene- ments, legions of undereducated and unemployed citizens, undertrained and undermanned police forces facing well- financed and elaborately organized crime as well as anarchic street rioting and a shrinking urban tax base for coping with a growing welfare clientele. But urbanism and industrialization are also rich resources. They make pos- sible an unprecedented quantity and quality of transportation and communi- cation facilities. The aggregation of people and institutions permits a more efficient educational system for the identification and exploitation of talent. The very size of the potential audience and market facilitates the expansion and diversification of intellectual and cultural opportunities. Contemporary America lives with the tension between the problems and the challenges. Can we learn to understand and live with urbanization and indus- trialization? Will we be defeated by the costs or inspired by the opportuni- ties? Freedom is a product of awareness: awareness of choice, of the possibilities, of alternatives. Seizing freedom is a matter of courage, of willingness to face alternatives and, on occasion, to pay the price of being different.