TH E LIBRARY QUARTERKLY Volume XXII APRIL 1952 Number 2 THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY PIERCE BUTLER D IFFERENCES are always more con- spicuous than resemblances. This is true of human activities as well as of physical objects. For ex- ample, it is easier to see the peculiari- ties of librarianship than those charac- teristics that it shares with every other learned profession. In the same way an attempt to define the cultural function of the library will turn out to be chiefly the problem of identifying traits that are common to many cultural functions. Ac- cordingly, the present inquiry must start at a point which may at first seem un- necessarily remote from its issue. I What is culture in general, and what does it do? Factual answers to these questions are easy. Historically, a cul- ture is the mode of life that a particu- lar people has developed and standard- ized. Structurally, it is a complex of physical, social, and intellectual com- ponents. Practically, it is the means whereby man copes with nature. But all such statements merely enumerate data pertinent to the problem. They explain nothing. Instead, they are so indeter- inuate that all sorts of fallacious cul- tural theories have been based upon them. Thus in the present scientistic age culture is commonly regarded as the behavior of man as a zoological species. But this definition is only pseudoscien- tific: its terms misrepresent the things they refer to, and in combination they propound a falsehood. With respect to his mode of living, man is not zoblogical, for most of his activities are biologically irrelevant. Again, when men are classi- fied by their cultures, they form not one species but many. And, correspond- ingly, because man's activities so fre- quently involve repression of condi- tioned reflexes, the term "behavior" with its modern connotations cannot be applied to them; "conduct" is 'a more accurate description. Moreover, the total proposition stated in these erro- neous terms is itself an error; culture, instead of being merely the servant of man, is in many ways his master. Under any naturalistic hypothesis the most distinctive characteristics of culture remain inexplicable. It is true that man fabricates his living routines out of the materials and forces of na- ture, but he does so voluntarily, not under any natural compulsion. Even in civilization individuals or whole nations may, if they choose, slough off their 79
80 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY culture and revert to bestiality-as re- cent history and current news abun- dantly testify. Yet culture, this purely optional human artificiality, comes to life under the hands of the men who make it, escapes their control, and as- sumes dominion over them. In many ways it resembles a biological organism. It persists through time, while the gen- erations in which it incorporates itself appear and vanish. Its development is distinctly embryological: the simple be- comes complex, uniformity turns into diversity, not at haphazard but in di- rectional movement toward an order as yet nonexistent. The end product differs completely from the origin, and both from all intermediate phases. Men do things for personal and empirical rea- sons, but culture turns their deeds to ends that the doers of them neither foresaw nor intended. For instance, out of the pooled book funds of a neighbor- hood, civilization has elaborated its present library system. Similarly, all cultural activities have a strong physio- logical cast; the farm, the bank, and the factory co-operate organically with railroads for arteries, electric wires for nerves, and money for enzymes. Culture is in the world yet not of it. Although culture cannot transcend the limits of nature, it alters nature in every particular, including mankind it- self. Every human being is a creature of culture: while the animal lives by the instinctive behaviors of its species, man lives by acquired racial1 routines. The phrase "man in a state of nature" is self-contradictory. Man becomes hu- man only as he departs from nature. The most primitive people actually known to anthropology have already 1 The tern "race" is used here in its historical, not in its genealogical, sense-a distinction that for the weal and woe of mankind is too seldom ob- served. departed so far that even an adult among them could not long survive without the aid of cultural ideas, arti- facts, and co-operations. His instincts have become so vestigial that, uncon- trolled, they produce only disastrous reactions. From lowest savagery to highest civilization man lives in, by, and for culture. In culture man moves through realms of experience that no animal can enter -rational consciousness of himself, of nature, and of values. Thus he ceases to be merely a denizen of the world and becomes an agent in it. Although he cannot make anything out of nothing, he can rearrange the content of his environment to produce things that without him could have no existence. In this sense he is truly creative-he re- makes the world to his liking. But he is a judge as well as a creator. He ap- praises and evaluates every thing and event by cultural standards. Hence, being at once a creator and a judge, man must needs be an artist; he makes and does things whereby he can attain value experiences ranging all the way from homely utility to the subtlest aesthetic, moral, and intellectual refine- ments. In culture, likewise, man finds his highest aspirations and his deepest loyalties. By "a good life" or "happi- ness" he means a mode of living in which material, social, and intellectual values can be experienced together in their greatest purity, variety, and in- tensity. And in the last analysis man's inmost compulsions are cultural: what he calls his self-respect, altruism, and patriotism are not really directed to himself, his fellows, and posterity as persons but to the kind of life they shall lead and the values they shall cherish. Thus, from every point of view,
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 8I man's humanity and culture are ultra- natural. Both are artificial in the sense that man's will and not the cosmos produces them. The one cannot exist without the other. Each is at once the original and the derivative. Man evokes culture out of the latent possibilities of nature, and culture evokes humanity out of the latent possibilities of man. Paradoxically, however, man can pro- duce culture only to the extent that he has already become human, and he can become human only to the extent that he is already culturalized. Yet humani- ty and culture are not identical or even different aspects of the same thing: they are as distinct as a bird and its nest. II Every culture, high or low, is a com- plex or physical, social, and intellectual components, which, without straining the terms, may here be called equip- ment, organization, and scholarship. These coexist not in mere aggregate but in organic integration, so that each component at once supports, and is sup- ported by, the others. Without suitable artifacts men cannot carry their co- operations or thought very far; equip- ment and scholarship must remain rudi- mentary in the absence of civil order; and even the best goods and customs are useless if men do not understand their structure, operation, and purpose. The modern mind seems unable to recognize the pluralistic character of culture and habitually confuses the whole with one or another of its com- ponents. Thus modern Eastern Euro- peans consistently identify civilization with material equipment, while we Westerners commonly equate it with social organization. We constantly say "society" when we mean "culture," and "democracy" when we mean "civiliza- tion," and, by the same prejudice, we think we can trace back to social ori- gins not only houses and tools but even morality and consciousness.2 Such va- garies are plausible because every cul- tural activity involves the social, but false because it involves at the same time and in equal measure the physical and the intellectual. III The basic processes of culture are plainly the production, distribution, and use of human artificialities. These processes, however, are secular: prop- erly speaking, no single generation per- forms them in its own lifetime, but a race of men operating through cen- turies. And, though the performance may be spontaneous and at times auto- matic, it is not inevitable. Even when it is unconscious, culture remains volun- tary and hence variable. But freedom to do a thing necessarily carries free- dom not to do it, or to do something different. Consequently, despite historic pressures, people are always at liberty to stand still, advance, or retreat cul- turally and even, by misuse of culture, to win negative instead of positive val- ues-distress, failure, and nisery in- stead of ease, success, and happiness. Every cultural process becomes more complex as culture advances. But in our own civilization these complexities 'But this is only a particular manifestation of a general monistic trend in modern thought that is, no doubt, historically inevitable. Western aviliza- tion has lately accomplished so much by analysis, induction, and geneticism that, almost instinctively, it seeks by the same methods the unity that ration- ality requires. Accordingly, it endeavors to reduce all experience to one kind only. But this is unneces- sary. Unity appears as often in union as in uni- formity. The many can become one by synthesis. All the varied routines of a people coalesce in cul- ture, just as all the diversities of culture and nature unite in the theistic universe.
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY are generally understood in only two of the three components of culture. Econ- omists have long since explored and explained the ramifications of our pro- duction, distribution, and utilization of material goods. Somewhat less thor- oughly sociologists have done the same for our social organizations. But this cannot be said of our scholarship. Here our ideas are usually less discriminating than our vocabulary. The production of ideas, for instance, we call "research" in science, "invention" in technology, and "study" in humanity, without rec- ognizing the implications of the verbal distinctions we are making. But this semantic anomaly is only typical of our general indifference to all the processes of scholarship. So long as we can keep busy in practice, we are content to re- nmain unsophisticated in theory. In fact, it might almost be said that only the scientistic and pseudoscientific among *us concern themselves greatly over what they call "methodology." But this, as these people develop it, is markedly unrealistic, tendentious, and stultifying.3 This state of affairs, however, is as perilous as it is unnecessary. Scholar- ship, like every other concentration of power, is potentially dangerous. Un- controlled, it resembles its social or physical analogue-a mob or a run- away engine. Ideas mishandled may be lethal. The Devil can quote Scripture to his purpose. No lie is so false as a tissue of carefully selected truths. By every count, then, the intellectual com- ponent of civilization, like its equip- ment and organization, may be safely handled only by men who understand it. But in the case of scholarship this should not be too difficult. The basic processes are by no means recondite. Anyone can easily discover from his own intellectual experience their major forms and ruling principles. And this, as a matter of fact, is all that will be attempted in the following analysis. IV Man gets his ideas from two sources -his own experience and the experi- ence of others. Of these, the first may be primary, but practically the second is the more important. Without com- municated experience man can hardly become rational. Whether a real Tar- zan, deprived of all human contacts from infancy, could attain even a rudi- mentary intelligence may be debatable. But certainly, under normal circum- stances, the individual, as boy and man, depends more on communicated than on direct experience for his intellectual development. He listens more often to the voices of his fellows than to the sounds of nature. He sees farther and more clearly through other people's eyes than through his own. And his thoughts, for the most part and for the best part, are rarely original. But no experience by itself induces a corresponding idea in the human mind. An awareness becomes conscious only as it is identified by reference to prior awarenesses. Scholarship is a cumula- tion of ideas that are not merely added together but linked with each other by recognitions of likeness and difference. This fact appears clearly in language, which is a mode of thought as well as a medium of communication. Every verb and common noun generalizes into a species all identical experiences that, taken singly, could be known only by "Historical methodology," for example, com- monly deals only with the formation of historical ideas and neglects or ignores their diffusion and application. Furthermore, it is pseudoscientific and consists largely of big names for little things and doctrinary criteria that would condemn the work of every great historian.
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 83 proper names. Similarly, every adjec- tive and adverb is an abstraction of a common quality from dissimilar ex- periences. And, in exactly the same way, the compacted ideas thus induced by sets of primary experiences become themselves secondary experiences that consolidate into still higher generaliza- tions and abstractions. But, for either of these processes to occur, both experience and thought must accumulate, and for this the past must virtually project itself into a con- tinuous present. Now the only place on earth where that can happen is a hu- man consciousiness.4 But even there the possibilities of nature must be cultur- ally exploited. Man's memory will pro- duce mere reverie instead of recollec- tion unless cultural discipline compels it to be selective in both its formation and its operation. In the most serious connection a child or a subnormal adult will retain and recall irrelevant details that a mature person would not remem- ber at all, or would not notice if he did. For ideas to crystallize into scholarship, there must be selective rejection as well as preservation. Scholarship, however, is more than a permanent body of selected ideas that have been integrated with each other. From these ideas in their totality there emanates a common sense or synoptic meaning.5 But in this as in every other particular, human thought is quite dif- ferent from what most modern treatises on psychology, logic, and epistemology make it. These doubly oversimplify: first they isolate each intellectual activi- ty, and then they reject its content and context, so as to leave only the empty process for consideration. This proce- dure, however, is wholly unrealistic. Man cannot think without thinking of something and to some purpose. But current academic opinion explicitly or implicitly denies this. It regards each idea as a simple unitary reaction, thought as a linear sequence of such reactions, and scholarship as a network of channels through which these chain reactions flow. In reality, every idea is a whole constellation of simultaneous awarenesses6 that form the galaxy of scholarship by their overlapping. Roughly speaking, then, three phases may be distinguished in the production of scholarship; experience induces cor- responding ideas in the human mind; there they are selectively correlated and preserved; and out of the whole emerges an over-all meaning or synop- tic significance. For a culture to exist, its scholarship must be diffused in living minds, and, for the culture to endure, that scholar- ship must be transmitted from gener- ation to generation. Actually, however, both results are produced by the same operation. Every normal community consists of young, middle-aged, and old In an animal it is not a conscious recognition of past experience that persists but only the physio- logical effect of past experience. But neural reflexes conditioned by past experience are no more con- scious recognitions of memory than are those con- ditioned by heredity-the instincts. ' Our certainty that the sun will rise tomorrow morning is a good example of such a synopsis. This is not, as is often asserted, a statistical inference from the uniformity of all past occurrences. On the contrary, it is the common sense of all we know concerning mathematics, physics, and as- tronomy in this connection. 6 Even under the artificial conditions of a psycho- logical laboratory, the content of a human con- sciousness cannot be reduced to a single awareness -as, for example, of a particular color. Although all the accompanying elements of normal experi- ence (e.g., form, size, texture) may be eliminated, the subject will be marginally aware of their ab- sence and of many other things, such as the pre- liminaries of the experiment and its apparent pur- pose.
84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY people living together. Consequently, any idea disseminated today will per- sist through the lifetime of the young- est person now receiving it. But in the meantime he will have communicated it to other persons, as yet unborn, who will carry it in the same way into a more distant future. Of the various means by which ideas pass from mind to mind, demonstrative action is the simplest. Because every cultural act corresponds to ideas in the mind of the person who does it, the performance itself may induce the same ideas in the mind of an attentive on- looker. That a child obtains much of its first scholarship by watching the activi- ties of its elders is generally recognized, but the extent to which adults depend on example for the same purpose is less often noticed. Yet many humanistic ideas must be thus transmitted, and much of our technological lore can be taught only, as we say, "on the job." But in all such cases the demonstrative acts are usually accompanied by oral comments and explanations. These involve language, which is the commonest method for the communi- cation of ideas. But speech also is dem- onstrative action, though of a symbolic instead of an operative character. As such, it is more comprehensive and ef- fective than example. By it a person not only can explain what he is doing at the moment but can also expound his memories of the past and his designs on the future, including in every case both his primary ideas and their intel- lectual and emotional derivatives. But just as speech goes beyond ex- ample in the diffusion of ideas, so liter- ature improves upon language. The ex- act point where a linguistic communi- cation becomes literary7 may be inde- finable, but that the latter is a distinct and superior method is proved by its early appearance in cultural evolution. Every primitive people has an oral lit- erature of an extent and variety that always surprises the beginner in an- thropology. This is composed of tradi- tional texts, in each of which a group of interrelated ideas have been crystal- lized. As these texts are recited over and over again, every one in the com- munity will come to know them and can refer to them in his memory when occasion requires a particular idea thus recorded.8 Furthermore, all these primi- tive oral literatures already use both the fundamental literary forms-factu- al description and fictional representa- tion. The first deals chiefly with the kind of ideas that are here called scien- tific and technological, and it commu- nicates them directly. It describes lit- erally the recognitions induced in a human mind by things and events. The parallel fictional literature, however, has a totally different character. For the most part it incorporates human- istic ideas, and it communicates them by implication. A fable, for example, talks about animals, but it tells of men and women. It describes characters that never lived and events that never hap- pened, not to deceive but to impart 'The transition from language to literature cor- responds exactly to similar transitions in cultural equipment and organization. An artifact becomes beautiful when its form induces a secondary ex- perience of value beyond the primary one of utility. A deed likewise becomes noble when benevolence as well as justice is recognizable in it. And just so a text becomes literary when it evokes a double awareness-not only of the ideas incorporated in it but of the precision, force, and grace of its lan- guage. ' Even in our own, highly graphic culture there is at least one example of such oral literature. Everyone knows and uses the jingle "Thirty days hath September...." Yet practically all of us learned it not from a book but by hearing other people recite it.
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 85 common sense and worldly wisdom. And, finally, all cultures have a current as well as a traditional literature. Ora- tory and debate are well developed even among barbarians. By means of them the community not only thinks, as it were, corporately, but it likewise dif- fuses the content of the group mind among all its members to produce what we know as public opinion. Thus in the distribution of scholar- ship there are likewise three major methods. Some ideas are diffused by operative action, others by language, and still others by literature. Scholarship serves many masters and for many purposes. Along with equip- ment and organization, culture uses it to maintain itself, the race to exploit its environment, and the individual to at- tain personal satisfactions. Hence from every point of view the sole norm of scholarship is its utility, since, in the last analysis, it is but one of the means whereby men achieve experience of value. Therefore, any scholarship must be relative to the whole culture of which it is one component. But on this point modern thought is confused by its failure to distinguish between truth and scholarship. A scholarship is mere- ly the intellectual content of a particu- lar culture at a particular time. Truth is the limit which all scholarship ap- proaches as culture advances. Thus, though truth is absolute, scholarship varies. In the lower stages of cultural evolution the system of ideas whereby men conduct themselves rationally may consist largely of falsehoods. And even in a high civilization, where intellectual progress is rapid (as among ourselves in the fields of science and technology), the scholarly certainties of today may be rejected as delusions tomorrow.9 A scholarship is relative not only to the level of cultural development at which it occurs but also to the material on which it operates and the people who use it. It may be applied only to a specific field and by particular persons. Indeed, scholarship may become a lia- bility instead of an asset when it is separated from corresponding activi- ties. Certainly, this happens whenever a professional man is compelled by ad- verse circumstances to engage in un- skilled manual labor. Because his scho- larship is irrelevant to his work, it will hinder instead of help him. But even more humanly disastrous will be his cultural frustration: the professional ideas that occupy his mind press vainly for realization in experience. And, al- though the loss to the community may be infinitesimal in any individual case, it is real, for if such maladjustments become common all its routines of liv- ing must deteriorate. In use scholarship is also indivisible. Since every cultural activity involves a material, a method, and a motive, the scholarship necessary for its perform- ance must also be triple and include a science, a technology, and a humanity of corresponding sorts. This principle does not preclude intensive specializa- tion by various individuals in each of these branches, or even in tiny seg- ments of them, so long as all the branches are adequately utilized and the community integrates the results of ' But the relativity and historicity of scholarship have no significance whatever for the character or function of truth: they cannot impugn its finality or make it utilitarian. Indeed, the usefulness of an idea depends less on its verity than on its con- formity to the ideas by which it is surrounded. Each period has its intellectual no less than its lin- guistic idiom and can use no other. A premature idea, like Mendel's theory formerly, or a belated one, like astrology today, is practically nonexistent for current scholarship.
86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY these diverse activities. But, as civili- zation rises, the maintenance of such an equilibrium becomes ever more diffi- cult. History teems with examples of cultural disasters wrought by monistic scholarships, in which science, tech- nology, or humanity was used alone instead of in combination with the others.10 To be useful, a scholarship must observe concurrently factual reali- ties, operative possibilities, and human- istic imperatives. A third requirement of scholarship in operation is that it must have a sub- stance as well as a form. Theoretically, the opposite may seem possible. Indeed, there have been periods when it was generally believed that all man needs to live rationally is a valid intellectual method: with this he should be able to meet every occasion as it arises, identi- fy the significant facts, and devise the necessary procedure to accomplish what he desires. But this theory has never worked out in practice. The verb- alisms of Greek sophists, the dialectics of medieval Schoolmen, the rational- isms of the Enlightenment, the ideolo- gies of modern totalitarians, and the objectivities of current scientism have all proved culturally defective. To at- taim and maintain cultural values, man must use a scholarship that has a con- tent as well as a form. Sheer intellec- tualism without sound learning to back it is futile. In sum, then, the utilization of schol- arship iMvolves these basic principles: a scholarship must be relevant to its field and agents; it must include scien- tific, technological, and humanistic components; and it must have a ma- terial as well as a method. The utili- tarian norms of scholarship are, there- fore, relativity, integrity, and substan- tiality. V From the standpoint of scholarship, cultural evolution falls into three major phases, each of which is inaugurated by a particular invention. Language ad- vances man from bestiality to savagery, literature raises him to barbarism, and writing11 elevates him to civilization. But each of these inventions is only a variant of the same basic process-that of projecting ideas from the human consciousness into external forms, so that they can be manipulated more freely. In speech, ideas are only mo- mentarily incorporated in vocal sounds; in literature, as tradition, they endure as long as the culture; and in books they attain all but immortality. But, as the fixation becomes more permanent, every process of scholarship is also ex- tended and refined. With speech man enlarges greatly the horizon of his indirect experiences in space, time, and scope. Through the spoken words of his fellows he can see places that he has never visited, partic- ipate in events that happened before his birth, and detect behind the stolidity of his companions their personal feelings. And language likewise plays an impor- tant part in both the diffusion of schol- arship and its co-operative application. When literarv form is added to lan- 10 Our prohibition experiment illustrates the fal- lacy of exclusive factual realism; it failed because it ignored the possibilities of enforcement and the inevitable human reactions. Our former attempt at world govemment and, apparently, the pres- ent one exemplify the corresponding technological error: cultural advance cannot be achieved by merely devising a process, without regard for the material which it must use and the ends to which it may be diverted. And, finaly, totalitarianism in all its forms demonstrates the folly of replacing both science and technique with counterfeits crude- ly wrought in desire. "For convenience the term "writing" will here be used to include every graphic process, and "book" for every kind of graphic record.
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 87 guage, each of these facilities is carried still further. But it is only with writimg that they reach their highest powers. Civilized man makes constant use of graphic methods and by them achieves results otherwise impossible. With pen- cil and paper the scientist works out abstruse relationships beyond the ken of his mental calculations. With draw- ing instruments the engineer devises mechanical complications and preci- sions that by shop methods alone would be impracticable. And by writings the humanist disentangles evaluations and arguments from the confusions of mere meditation. But it is probably as an ex- tension of the capacity, precision, and permanence of the human memory that writing contributes most to the forma- tion of scholarship. For example, no mathematician, or world of mathemati- cians, could possibly memorize a table of logarithms. But a book can remem- ber the whole thing, without the error of a single digit, and do it practically forever. Furthermore, every book has a total significance that differs in kind from the sum of its elements. Even a merchant's bill establishes the monetary indebtedness of his customer by enu- merating the transactions through which he incurred it. And, at the other extreme, every treatise or work of fic- tion induces over-all synoptic ideas in the mind of its reader. In the communication of ideas, also, writing increases and multiplies the powers of language. A speaker can be heard only as far as his voice will carry and while he is speaking. A writer's reach through time and space is unlim- ited. In oral form an idea can pass from generation to generation only if the chain of transmission remains continu- ous; with the failure of a single link it is lost irrevocably. But in graphic form an idea can lie dormant almost inter- minably without dying. Inscribed clay tablets have lately communicated to living minds the ideas of the ancient Mesopotamians, after millenniums in which no man knew them or even the language and script in which they are written. With writing, literature, the third method of communication, also in- creases its earlier powers and develops new ones. Conditions that formerly occurred only occasionally are now con- tinuous. The listener need no longer wait upon the bard in person to hear his lay; the community now sits, as it were, in permanent assembly and lis- tens without confusion to the argu- ments of a thousand orators speaking simultaneously. In formal graphic texts a culture is always and everywhere vir- tually aware of the whole content of its mind. It likewise develops in the silent discourse of the book rhetorical refine- ments and literary devices beyond the scope of the spoken word. Indeed, the differentiation is now carried so far that every literate person requires three con- centric vocabularies for use, respective- ly, when he speaks, writes, and reads. But perhaps the most astonishing ad- vance produced by writing occurs in factual literature, which now includes nonlinguistic records as well as verbal texts-maps, pictures, tables, and dia- grams, on which ideas are immediately projected instead of passing through an intermediate translation into language. In the use of scholarship, no less than in its production and diffusion, graphic symbols excel oral discourse in every way. More especially, they liberalize the laws that make the cultural use of scholarship depend upon its relativity, integrity, and substantiality. Books allow a man to engage more freely in
88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY intellectual activities irrelevant to his vocation, without diminishing his cul- tural efficiency or his personal happi- ness. They likewise reduce the penalties imposed on the citizen and the com- munity for breaking the unity of schol- arship: books abet the individual in specializing intellectually to the very verge of monomania; but, at the same time, they aid the community in com- bining the activities of many such spe- cialists into a normal unity. And, final- ly, books permit a man to possess schol- arship vicariously. He can attain much of its substance by acquiring books in- stead of by study. From them he can often take the products of an intellec- tual discipline that he himself has never mastered. Indeed, in some fields today the scholar's bibliographical skill seems only slightly less important than his in- telligence. VI The book as a typical human artifact exists in two realms of being. In the realm of nature it is merely so much matter. Despite its artificial form, it differs by no whit from any other inani- mate object. All its properties are ex- plicable in terms of chemistry and physics. But in the realm of culture a book is something entirely different. Here it is a system of ideas that has been projected from one human con- sciousness into a permanent external form capable of reinducing the same ideas in any other human consciousness that makes actual contact with it. Moreover, this power is of a wholly nondynamic character: a book produces just as strong an effect on its ten thou- sandth reader as it did on the first. In the realm of nature, books do not coalesce with each other; in the realm of culture they do. Volumes whose ideas overlap combine to form a subject liter- ature, and all subject literatures to form a literary universe, which contains, roughly speaking, the totality of schol- arship reduced to potential form. But the universe of ideas is by no means identical with the universe of books in which it is thus stored. The two differ at many points in both their formation and their structure. In scholarship the elements and pattern of each constella- tion are fixed by the experience that produces it. In a book ideas may be de- tached from unrelated experiences and arbitrarily recombined to serve the pur- pose of the author. Hence, the same idea may reappear in many different books but each time in a different set- ting. Again, scholarship is truly pro- gressive, literature merely cumulative. When an idea is refuted, it becomes nonexistent in scholarship except as a historical fact, but in literature it lives on alongside the new idea that contra- dicts it, so long as the books containing it endure. And, finally, the interrela- tionships of ideas are self-revealing, those of literature obscure. To organize scholarship is comparatively easy; to classify books, extremely difficult."2 For all these reasons the universe of 1 The distinctions made here between truth, scholarship, and literature will perhaps appear more clearly in a specific example. The Battle of Gettysburg was a real event, and the truth con- cerning it is absolute and unalterable. But the corresponding scholarship varies at any moment with the data available and the point to which historical investigation has been carried. The sub- ject literature, however, reflects that scholarship only confusedly, imperfectly, and inaccurately. It includes not only monographs dealing specifically with the subject but every history in which the battle is mentioned and every essay, novel, and poem in which ideas induced by the event are uti- lized, irrespective of whether the opinions presented are mistaken and obsolete or valid and still ac- cepted. Furthermore, no single book in that liter- ature incorporates all its author's thoughts on the subject. And, finally, since study must precede publication, the subject literature must always be slightly belated.
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 89 books is a chaos, and one of the persist- ent problems of civilization is how to cope with its superhuman magnitude and disorder. Millions of texts are al- ready in existence, and hundreds of new ones are produced every day. All of them are repetitive, most of them are obsolete, and many of those that are still valid are incompatible with each other. For any person to find in the welter those particular volumes that he needs is obviously all but impossible. Accordingly, civilization has developed various devices to facilitate the process. The most systematic of these is bibli- ography, which might be defined as the geography of the book world. This includes, to continue the metaphor, not only maps but also guidebooks and travel narratives-not only those tabu- lar lists of subjects, authors, and titles (to which the term is usually limited) but all histories of literature, reviews, advertisements, comments, allusions, and references. But in all these varied forms bibliography has serious empir- ical limitations. In general, it is so tech- nical that only professional bookmen can use it. Yet even for them it is far from satisfactory: if it is exhaustive, it tells too much for most purposes, if selective, too little; and, worst of all, it becomes obsolescent on the day that it goes to the printer. Of a totally different character but to the same cultural purpose is the book trade. This, theoretically, might be ex- pected to keep every community sup- plied with the books that its citizens need. But practically, of course, it falls far short of doing so. Booksellers as a class are not bibliographical experts. Furthermore, to perform their cultural office, they must pay themselves wages, on behalf of the community, in the form of profits. But to do this they must rely chiefly on mass demand and supply and, in either case, ignore the unusual and the special. In part these limita- tions are overcome by the development of an international mail-order market. With the world instead of the local com- munity as his public, a dealer can con- centrate on a particular subject litera- ture, however recondite, and still make a living. But even at the best, although he thus raises demand to profitable di- mensions, and although he draws upon other dealers to replenish his stock, his problem of supply is already critical and every year becomes progressively more so. The world's increase in popu- lation and in literacy has long since out- run its book stock. Books are becoming even rarer and more expensive. Thus the status of the individual in the book world is constantly deteriorating. If he has the bibliographical knowledge and apparatus to determine what books meet his needs, he will probably have difficulty in finding copies of them in the market. If he can find them, they will probably cost more than he can afford. And, if he can afford them, un- der modern living conditions he will probably be unable to give them house room. Now the library is a device by which civilization attempts to resolve most of these difficulties. It may be defined as a collection of books that have been se- lected and organized with respect to their content and the intellectual needs of its public."3 Thus it is essentially a microcosm of the book universe, of such a nature that the chief character- istics of scholarship and of the litera- ture containing it are reproduced on a scale commensurate with local condi- tions. The library, therefore, serves I In the cae of a private library this public may consist of a single person.
90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY three major purposes, which, for con- venience, may here be distinguished as its scholarly, bibliographical, and eco- nomic functions. A library is obviously a reservoir of scholarship. In its book stock are stored, in potential form, innumerable ideas that mankind has garnered by experience and intelligence through the ages. Because these ideas exist as sepa- rate units, any of them may be used singly, in related groups, or in arbitrary selections, to induce corresponding ki- netic recognitions in a mind that re- quires them. Yet the library is more than a mere array of such unitary po- tentials. Since the cosmos and the ra- tionality that produce them are inter- related, these ideas combine to form a continuous fabric. But only the library displays clearly this synthetic character of scholarship, for everywhere else it is concealed by the complexities of civili- zation. Thus the library is intellectually normative for its community and acts as a corrective to the distortions of the educational curriculum, the vagaries of the press, and the excesses of vocation- al specialization. Here alone science, technology, and humanity truly come together and coalesce into a synoptic significance. Accordingly, the norms of the library, whatever its scale or char- acter, are, on this dimension, the rela- tivity, the integrity, and the substan- tiality of the potential scholarship stored up in it. Now, as has been previously re- marked, books, the actual packages of ideas which the library must use, are so arbitrary in their content, so infinite in their variety, and so intractable in their forms that only librarianship, amateur or professional, can find even crude working solutions for the two great bibliographical problems set by them. The first of these is how to dis- cover in the literary chaos what texts will best present each segment of schol- arship required by a particular intellec- tual program. The other problem is how to organize these texts after they have been selected, so as to make the schol- arship they carry accessible as a whole and in all its parts-and for every pur- pose. But, generally speaking, the li- brary resolves both of these difficulties. It consists of a book stock and a cata- log corresponding to the intellectual needs of its public. Separately these components would be comparatively weak, but together they possess a unique cultural potency. And the norms of the library with respect to these artifacts are, clearly, the efficiency, economy, and convenience of their op- eration. The economic function of the library is likewise double, because books are relatively both rare and expensive. On neither point are any quantitative meas- ures available, yet the basic facts are unmistakable. Even to guess how large an edition of a book would have to be printed to supply every one who ought to read it with a copy would be fool- hardy, but obviously the number would surpass the limits of practicability. And in the same way, although we cannot compute even roughly the cost of pro- viding every citizen individually with all the books he should use in his life- time, we can be quite certain that the sum would awe even a federal bureau- crat. But here again civilization, by means of the library, has circumvented impossibilities. In it literature is com- munalized, so that each book can be used by a multitude of readers and its cost met by infinitesimal contributions from all who are benefited by having it
THE CULTURAL FUNCTION OF THE LIBRARY 9I accessible-which, as a matter of fact, includes every member of the commu- nity. But, because this is an intangible, long-term, and mass benefit, the norms of the library, in this particular, must be statistical: they consist of such things as the per capita cost, circula- tion, and failures to supply the litera- ture needed. Any particular library may therefore be appraised by the quality of its schol- arship, the utility of its service, and the magnitude of its operations-provided, of course, that in each case the index is read in terms appropriate to the com- munity. But such an empirical appraisal will obscure rather than reveal the cul- tural value of the institution. All the functions performed by the library are of a synthetic character: they are ef- fected by a steady stream of services, each of which is but a microscopic eddy in the tidal flow of human life. There- fore, to realize the true significance of the library, one should not merely ob- serve the effects of its presence but con- template, in his imagination, the results that would follow from its absence. Ob- viously, if by some catastrophe all pub- lic and private libraries were obliterated (as has almost happened in Germany), every cultural routine would slacken and many of them would cease. The li- brary contributes not merely to the well- being of civilization but to its existence.