A Unpacking Library Posters A Theoretical Approach Nancy R Thomas This paper explores the semiotic aspects of poster graphics observed as furnishings in selected libraries. Specifically, the paper analyzes the poster series produced and mar- keted by the American Library Association (ALA) as advertisements to promote read- ing and library use and considers how the behavior exhibited in these commercial scenes creates a discourse and subject positions that may ultimately be disconfirming for some library users. The theoretical framework for the study draws on a constitutive view of communication, which acknowledges the construction of knowledge and identity in interaction within social situations. Within this framework, Foucault's the- ory of discursive formation makes it possible to understand poster graphics as discur- sive practice, while Scheff's theory of the social bond draws attention to the unforeseen consequences for both library users and library professionals of the world view created by such posters. Unpacking Library Posters: A Theoretical Approach Concern for the experience of the user in interaction with information systems lies at the heart of contemporary research in library and information stud- ies (LIS). As explained by Dervin and Nilan, and evident in the work of Kuhlthau, Belkin, and others, this approach represents a significant depar- ture from previous approaches, which gave primary research attention to infor- mation systems and the ways in which information resources were represented, organized, stored, and retrieved.1 This shift in focus is explicit in a study by Mokros, Mullins, and Saracevic, who sought to investigate social dimensions of interactions between users and refer- ence librarians conducting an online search.2 These theorists concluded that, in interactions with users, library pro- fessionals express not only theories of professional practice but also theories of personhood, which include how librari- ans regard library users and themselves. Exploring service encounters as commu- nicative interaction is also evident in the research of Radford and Chelton.3 While Chelton explored interactions as part of the give-and-take of reference services to adolescents in school media centers, Radford considered the importance of nonverbal communication as a relation- al dimension in service encounters in academic library settings. Although the physical environment both frames communicative events and provides situational clues for interac- tional participants in terms of agency and institutional values and valuing, library environments have seldom been the subject of systematic research.4 However, in an exploratory study of selected school, public, and academic 42 Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 43 About the Author Nancy P. Thomas is Associate Professor, Emporia State University, School of Library and Information Management, Emporia, Kansas. libraries conducted in 1994, Thomas noted the existence of a library vernacu- lar in terms of environmental elements, social norms and expectations, and cul- tural traditions, regardless of the user groups for which the libraries provided resources and services. Nowhere were social and cultural values more explicit- ly available than in posters chosen by librarians to decorate their facilities.5 This paper explores images and roles being modeled in selected library posters as well as the cultural traditions and value systems that receive discursive support within these library texts. Specifically, the analysis considers exam- ples of the two poster series most often observed at study-site libraries: the "READ" posters and the "Kids Who Read Succeed" posters. Created by ALA Graphics, an ALA unit, these posters are of particular interest because, by virtue of the context of their creation as promo- tional items and their purchase by librar- ians, they function as a privileged discourse - a discourse that not only "reflects] or mirror[s] objects, events, and categories preexisting in the social and natural world . . . [but] actually con- structs] a version of these things."6 Advertising the Library: ALA Posters as Media Texts While promotional posters of the kind produced for libraries by ALA have not drawn the attention of researchers in library and information studies, discur- sive power in advertising has been con- sidered in research literature across a number of theoretical and disciplinary contexts. For example, Goldman consid- ered techniques and strategies advertis- ers employ in selling media images as well as consumer products.7 In his work, Goldman called attention to two issues: (1) the repetitious nature of mes- sages and themes that serve to create and reify what they only seem to describe; and (2) the use of frameless photographs to establish credibility, create intimacy, and minimize the difference between the "real" and the unreal in the mind of the observer. In their exploration of the dynamics of advertising, Hall and Neitz explained that a photograph and its cap- tion act together to create an interpretive "gestalt" in the observer, which enhances the chance that the meanings intended by the message's creators will be correctly constructed by viewers.8 In addition, the repetition of a central theme across different target audiences also increases the likelihood that the symbolic connections between the images and the text will work for a vari- ety of observers. As these theorists sug- gest, the power of commercial representations of this sort lies in their ability to convince even the most skepti- cal consumer to buy the image or model presented and transfer that image - an image of the desired self of the viewer - to the product, such that the acquisition of the product and the achievement of the image are one and the same. While these revelations about the advertiser's craft will hardly come as a surprise, what may not be so generally realized is that the longed-for images, as well as the desire to attain them, are neither univer- sal nor naturally occurring within a col- lective psyche. Rather, they are socially Winter 2001
44 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science constructed corporate creations made to seem natural or essential through media conditioning of public perception. Noting the variety and complexity of meaning in advertising, Barthels's study considered the process of objecti- fication of women in advertisements as embedded in a web of "cultural cur- rents, symbols, and processes," which makes it more difficult to free one's thinking from the hold that a gendered valuing of external appearance has on the public and individual psyche.9 For this reason, Barthels sought to under- stand the social function of gendered images in advertising through a multi- theoretical framework. Of particular value for Barthels's analysis was Baudrillard's model, which framed media consumption in terms of psycho- analytic conceptualizations of identifi- cation, projection, transcendence, power, sexuality, and the sociological notions of status and prestige. In media studies, Stuart Hall also posited adver- tisements as polysemous texts, the inter- pretation of which depends on the social situation of the viewer. For example, Hall suggested that those who are most closely aligned with the dominant ideol- ogy will most likely "produce dominant readings of a [given] text," while those "whose social situation" places them outside the mainstream culture will pro- duce "oppositional readings." Readers and viewers whose social experience places them someplace between these two positions will "modify or inflect" the meanings of the text to "meet the needs of their specific situation."10 Like Barthels, both Kilbourne and Goffman have also studied gender issues in advertisements.11 Their particular concern is not so much in what is being sold overtly in media representations as in their unintended consequences - those ideas about themselves, other peo- ple, and the social context that people take away from an encounter with ads. For example, in Gender Advertisements, Goffman explores the limited "subject positions" created for women through depictions of female behavior.12 Of par- ticular interest to the present analysis is Goffman's identification of techniques such as posture, gesture, and clothing that differentiate and stratify representa- tions of roles and behavior in advertise- ments along gender and class lines. For her part, Kilbourne's studies have raised awareness of the ramifications of sexism in advertising, particularly the objectifi- cation of women and the negative impact of this objectification on mean- ingful relationships and self-esteem.13 Because the techniques used by commercial advertisers are employed in ALA promotional posters, the works of the theorists reviewed here have particu- lar relevance to the present analysis. As will be seen, the posters displayed texts that should not be dismissed as neutral "backdrops" that engage or fail to engage a user in some aesthetic response. On the contrary, they constitute a semiotically loaded communicative moment when library users experience the generalized other, the experience of which involves an understanding of the self within the situation.14 Research Questions This paper aims to deconstruct ALA-pro- duced library posters as privileged dis- course in which sociocultural assump- tions, values, and symbols are embedded. Specifically, this study addresses the fol- lowing questions: What values and tradi- tions are reflected in the majority of ALA Graphics posters observed at study-site libraries and how are they expressed dis- cursively? What subject positions do these media texts make possible and con- ceal? Finally, what are the possible con- sequences for library users and librarians who engage with these posters? Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 45 Theoretical Framework The analysis of library posters presented in this paper is theoretically grounded in a constitutive view of communica- tion, as articulated in the recent work of Mokros et al. and Mokros and Deetz.15 A constitutive view of communication rec- ognizes knowledge as created interac- tively by social participants within a moment of engagement. This view dif- fers significantly from the "information model" of communication proposed by Shannon and Weaver, which considers communication instrumentally, as a tool people use in making connections with one another and as a process wherein a speaker sends an informational message through a designated channel to one or more listeners.16 Within an information model, the major concerns center on clarity of the channel and the message and the effects of messages on listeners. A constitutive view of communication, by contrast, focuses primarily on meanings - which do not inhere in messages or exist as products of individual cognitive activity but arise, instead, within communica- tive moments, constructed through engagement with others.17 Within this understanding, language is necessarily arbitrary and contextual; the subjective- ly shared experience of the world that it describes can be constructed only com- municatively. An important tenet of communication from a constitutive per- spective is that a sense of who one is does not exist a priori but is constituted through language within communicative moments, which taken together create a fabric of experience that encompasses both one's personal history and future expectations.18 The analysis also reflects Foucault's theory of discursive formation, which allows the researcher to consider experi- enced reality as it is formed discursive- ly, as well as the assumptions and ideological values which are embedded in institutionally sanctioned practices, policies, texts and artifacts.19 Foucault uses the term "discursive formation" to encompass systems of discursive state- ments, objects, and concepts organized into five mutually reinforcing units: practices, rules, roles, knowledge, and power. Because they are so explicitly "discursive" according to Foucault's def- inition, ALA poster graphics function as texts in the same ways as do more con- ventional linguistically based social practices. Scheff s theory of the social bond offers a theoretical frame for considering the potential ramifications or conse- quences for users in engaging with these discursive practices.20 According to Scheff, all social engagements are expe- rienced as a continuous series of interac- tive moments in which an individual feels either pride (in the acceptance, val- idation, and positive regard displayed by social others) or embarrassment or shame (in the face of disapproval, exclu- sion, or rejection). Scheffs theory con- tributes to an understanding not only of how external experience may be inter- nalized and used in the construction of a self within a given communicative encounter but also of how encounters with physical aspects of the social con- text can be construed as constituting an experience of the larger social sphere in which all such encounters are necessar- ily embedded. Thus, in the present instance, Foucault's theory of discursive forma- tion is construed as a constitutive theory of communication at an institutional and social level, while Scheff's theory of the social bond acts as a constitutive theory of communication at the level of individual identity creation. Such a framework makes interaction the key- stone of inquiry by displacing the con- cern for "systems," collections, and programming that represent the leitmotif Winter 2001
46 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of traditional approaches to library research. Through the combination of these theoretical frameworks, the fol- lowing analysis seeks to add to the research initiatives of Frohmann, Mokros et al., Radford, and Chelton in applying communication theory to pro- fessional activities in a variety of library contexts.21 Method The data analyzed in this paper were col- lected as part of a comprehensive explo- ration of facilities in selected libraries in 1994. Method for the original study was anchored in assumptions of the interpre- tive paradigm, informed by the social construction of reality theory of Berger and Luckmann, and conducted accord- ing to the grounded theory model described by Glaser and Strauss.22 While precedents for applying a phenomeno- logical approach to investigations of environmental experiences in everyday settings come from research in educa- tion, environmental psychology, and geography, the research design was based on the first three steps of Scheffs four- stage "morphology" model.23 Scheff sug- gests that research in natural settings should begin with the preliminary explo- ration of a single case, followed by a microscopic exploration of several speci- men cases. In studies in which an expli- cation or deconstruction of meanings is of importance, the researcher becomes, by virtue of his or her status as a user of signs, an important participant in the critical process.24 For this reason, ethno- graphic methodologies are considered particularly useful. Research observations were con- ducted in two public (urban and subur- ban) libraries; school library media centers in an elementary, a middle, and a high school in a suburban district; and a K-8 school in an urban district nearby. The decision to observe these sites was aimed not at providing a representative sample of libraries but rather at explor- ing specific environments available to a variety of potential library users within a single geographic region. As with other kinds of exploratory studies in which purposive samples are part of the research design, no claims to generaliz- ability of research findings to other con- texts are made. Rather, the researcher sought to report what was deemed "wor- thy of others' attention" in terms of issues and problems that warrant further study.25 Data This paper presents an analysis of the seventeen ALA "READ" posters and four "Kids Who Read Succeed" posters on display at four of the six libraries included in the original study (see tables 1 and 2). Although a variety of other kinds of ALA-produced posters were also observed in study-site libraries, the "READ" and "Read/Succeed" series were included in this analysis because these series were the ones most often observed (N=21, or 62 percent of the total number). Produced under the aegis of the ALA, these posters exemplified privileged discourse within Foucault's definition. Details of specific posters observed at study-site libraries were confirmed through an examination of advertisements for the posters in an ALA Graphics catalog.26 Examples of the ALA "READ" series observed consisted of 22" x 34" frame- less full-color or black-and-white por- traits of well known entertainers and sports figures; each celebrity was pho- tographed holding a book. The word "READ" appears in large capital letters across the top of the poster, with the celebrity subject seated or standing below; in each poster, a caption appears Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 47 Table 1 ALA Posters at Study-Site Libraries Types of Sites: Urban Suburrban High Middle Primary K8 Total School School School School ALA Read 5 9 1 - - 2 17 ALA Read/Succeed 2 2 - - - - 4 Author Series - 2 - - - - 2 Read to Your Baby - 1 - - - - 1 ALADDC - - - 2 - - 2 Be Cool - - - 1 - - 1 Reading- A Magic Trip - - - - 1 12 Libraries Change Lives - 2 - - - - 2 Other - 3 - - - - 3 Total 7 19 1 3 1 3 34_ to the right or left of the figure identify- ing the star and the sponsor (e.g., "Oprah Winfrey for America's libraries"). Although the composition for the "READ" posters considered in this study is the same in each case, four posters evince anomalies. The additional text "Use Your Head" appears on the poster featuring the actor Andrew Shue. Posters featuring Ruben Blades and Edward Olmos substitute the Spanish words "Leer es Poder" for "READ." And one poster features an illustration (rather than a photograph) of a nonhu- man subject - a Muppet character, Miss Piggy- Unlike the "copycat" approach of the "READ" posters, the format of the posters in the "Kids Who Read Succeed" series varies.27 Of the examples observed, one features a Latina female reading to a female child and a Spanish phrase: "Empieza Joven; niños que leen tienen éxito." In a second, an adolescent male reader appears in silhouette against the light of a curtainless window open to the fire escape of what appears to be an urban tenement. Across the top of the poster is the text: "Gangbuster." The third "Read/Succeed" poster fea- tures three members of the Chicago Bulls basketball team. Approach to Analysis: The Researcher as Interpreter Interpreting or reading the library posters as texts in the study proceeded in terms defined by the hermeneutic relationship between the researcher or critic and the observed. Scheff has described this analytical process as "abduction," an "extremely rapid inter- nal dialogue between observation and imagination."28 This process - which, as Scheff suggests, models the one people use in making sense of experience on a daily basis - allows the juggling of theo- ry and data. It also contextualizes what is observed through the consideration of "counterf actuals" - an approach pio- neered by Pittenger, Hockett, and Danehy and employed by Mokros et al. in their study of online-searching behav- ior.29 In media studies, the intertextual- ity of visual texts is specifically acknowledged as a condition of mean- ing-making - that is, the meanings of a single image or text are constituted, structured, and transformed in relation to and within a web of other images and Winter 2001
48 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 2 Subject Occupation, Gender, and Ethnicity in ALA Posters Sites Series Subject/Title Occupation/Role Gender Ethnicity Book Title Urban ALA READ Sting Entertainment Male Anglo n/a ALA READ Michael J.Fox Entertainment Male Anglo n/a ALA READ Ruben Blades Entertainment Male Latino Adult Fiction ALA READ Bo Jackson Sports Male African American Adult Fiction ALA READ K.Yamaguchi Sports Female Asian Adult Romance ALA Read/ Gangbuster Adolescent Male Latino n/a Succeed ALA Read/ Empieza Joven Mother Female Latina n/a Succeed Suburban ALA READ Elvis Presley Entertainment Male Anglo Movie Script ALA READ Oprah Winfrey Entertainment Female African American Adult Fiction ALA READ Harrison Ford Entertainment Male Anglo n/a ALA READ Marlee Matlin Entertainment Female Anglo Children's Fiction ALA READ Andrew Shue Entertainment Male Anglo Adult Biography ALA READ Spike Lee Entertainment Male African American Adult Biography ALA READ Edward J. Olmos Entertainment Male Latino Adult Nonfiction ALA READ Michael Chang Sports Male Asian Children's Fiction ALA READ Sean Connery Entertainment Male Anglo Adult Nonfiction ALA John Goodman Entertainment Male Anglo n/a ALA Read Gangbuster Adolescent Male Latino n/a /Succeed ALA Read Chicago Bulls Sports Male Anglo/African Adult Nonfiction /Succeed American ALA Authors Sandra Cisneros Author Female Latina book list ALA Authors Terry McMillen Author Female African American book list ALA Read Teens Poster Adolescents Male, Latino n/a to Baby Female ALA Lleanos Garfield Cartoon Male cat n/a ALA Black Women General Females Female n/a ALA Lib's Nafl/ Library Wk n/a n/a n/a n/a /Lives ALA Lib's Celebrities Author/Ent's 6 a 2 F 4 w/ 2 n/a /Lives African American texts.30 As noted, Hall's theory speaks specifically to the inevitability of differ- ent critical readings of media texts. In Barthels's view, this sort of approach differs dramatically from a content-analytic approach, which con- strains observation to the identification of objects and behavior within one spe- cific experience.31 While content analy- sis is extremely useful in identifying items of interest, Barthels argues that texts can be read "more deeply" through the application of an "aberrant code," which considers what is observed with- Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 49 Table 2, continued Subject Occupation, Gender, and Ethnicity in ALA Posters High School ALA READ Miss Piggy Entertainment Female Pig n/a Middle School ALA DDC Ubrary n/a n/a n/a ALA DDC Library n/a n/a n/a ALA Be Cool Adolescents n/a n/a n/a K-8 ALA READ Whoopi Entertainment Female African American Children's Fiction Goldberg ALA READ Michael Keaton Entertainment Male Anglo Children's Fiction ALA Magic School Book title Male, Multiethnic Children's Fiction Bus Female Primary School ALA Magic School Book title Male, Multiethnic Children's Fiction Bus Female in systems of codes and signifiers that render the text more intelligible and meaningful. Because such an approach allows the researcher to draw upon a variety of theoretical frameworks as a way to understand the meaning of images in advertising, it is highly inter- pretive. Goffman's "pictorial pattern analysis" of gender in commercial advertisements provides another exam- ple of an interpretive research approach.32 Analysis An analysis of ALA posters at study-site libraries identified a "range of semiotic systems" in terms of linguistic and met- alinguistic codes that contributed to dis- cursive creation of institutional ideology or "knowledge."33 Such codes included the selection of poster advertisements as an appropriate genre in promoting library use; photographic techniques used in the overall design; the choice of subjects used to act as silent speakers for libraries; and details of their poses, clothing, and backdrop or set. While the selection of both the genre and the con- tent of the posters reflected themes con- sistent with contemporary advertising, use of particular advertising techniques also tapped "a preexisting set of under- standings about roles, meanings and styles that are shared" by both creators and viewers of media texts.34 Thus, the use of photographs helped create an aura of reality for the messages and images, while the overall size of the posters and their borderless design seemed to invite viewers to identify with the subjects. Creating the Library User: Production and Reproduction of Culture, Class, and Gender In spite of the fact that "America is fun- damentally multicultural and multira- cial," the ALA's "READ" and "Kids Who Read Succeed" posters suggest a relative- ly narrow array of behaviors, values, and ways of "being" for library users to con- sider.35 Patterns most evident in observed examples of the "READ" series seem to relate most explicitly to culture, social class, and gender. In the "READ" posters, for example, since celebrity superstars (by themselves signifiers of success) are selected as appropriate speakers "for America's libraries," a dis- course is established such that achieve- ment is construed as "winning," success as wealth, and self-worth as a function of Winter 2001
50 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science externals such as celebrity status and personal appearance.36 By the same token, an appeal to "upward mobility," and the "paramountcy of material well being" in texts that promise "Kids Who Read Succeed" provide support for a claim that, in words and images, posters reflect ideologies that Sillars identifies as the classic markers of the personal suc- cess and puritan-pioneer traditions in Euro- American culture.37 While the individual nature of achievement patterns was underscored in the ALA posters in the predominant use of individuals as poster subjects, the "copycat" design in terms of camera angle and pose, and the duplication of the message ("for America's libraries") diminishes the opportunity for the sub- jects to express for themselves either their unique personalities or their per- sonal power except in ways that were controlled by the posters' producers. By the same token, as models for behavior, the static poses and the lack of personal- ly created messages also suggests the promotion of a mainstream ethos or norm of acceptable library behavior as well as reading and library use. A sort of moralizing didacticism (Kids Who Read Succeed) and repeated imperatives to behave in appropriate ways (READ), as well as the practice of using aesthetic/decorative items to serve instrumental ends, is also consistent with this interpretation. A discourse that celebrates the attainment of knowledge as an individ- ual achievement and constitutes readers as both self-motivated and economically successful also constructs the antithe- sis - that failure, poverty, and ignorance are individual responsibilities and moral choices.38 These themes find expression in the "Gangbuster" poster, in which darkness surrounding the win- dow can be read as a metaphor for the urban environment, ignorance, and poverty; and the use of the word "gang" seems to invoke a sense of foreboding and a hint of violence. As noted, the scene in this poster places an adolescent male reader in a lighted window adja- cent to a fire escape. The transparency of the message - that reading (or literacy, education, knowledge) provides a way out of ignorance (and, perhaps, urban life) - will have purchase for those who espouse the dominant American ideolo- gy and work ethic. However, the manner in which the message is expressed and the reality that is constructed in the image create powerful subtexts that it is important to consider. For example, gen- der and age codes invoked by the juxta- position of image, metaphors, and texts expressly link innercity youths to gangs and constitute nonreading minority males specifically, and all nonreading teenage males by extension, as delin- quent and perhaps dangerous. Just as these library posters con- tribute to a social narrative that presents particular cultural values, they also reaf- firm notions of difference in terms of both gender and race. In fact, ethnic and gender stereotypes are embedded not only in the photographic techniques used in the library posters studied but also in the individuals chosen, their clothing, background details, objects, books, and the manner of their represen- tation. In terms of gender, ALA "READ" posters seem to reflect John Berger's view that, when presented in the media, men "act" and women "appear."39 In the ALA posters observed, females appear consistently in poses that suggest pas- sivity. There are two exceptions. In one, a woman is reading to a child; in the other, a celebrity figure skater poses in skating attire. Males, by contrast, appear most often in assertive or energized poses or surrounded by symbols of activity, skill, or achievement. While women are usually presented in conser- vative "business" attire, men are consis- tently photographed in casual clothing Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 5 1 (open-collared shirts and turtlenecks, rolled up sleeves, jeans) or in costumes appropriate for various sports activities (e.g., tennis, soccer). In addition, male athletes and entertainers are frequently photographed with objects defined by Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton as interactive (e.g., soccer ball, baseball bats, basketball, guitar), which sometime also serve as occupational markers.40 Both the outdoor and indoor settings created for most of the male "READ" celebrities tend to reflect a sort of blue- collar austerity and ruggedness.41 A gen- dered ordering of experience is suggested in the choice of males to rep- resent the sports of basketball, baseball, soccer, and tennis, while a female repre- sents figure skating, a sport traditionally considered a female activity. The difference in the presentation of gender was especially noted in ALA "READ" posters featuring Andrew Shue and Oprah Winfrey. Although both appeared to have been photographed in public parks sitting next to trees, Shue, with slightly tousled hair and wearing a soccer uniform, was photographed sit- ting next to a soccer ball. Leaning slight- ly forward, he seemed caught momentarily on the sidelines but ready to return to the game. Winfrey, carefully coifed and conservatively outfitted, was pictured in a more recumbent position, a posture that Goffman specifically identi- fies as a form of ritualized subordina- tion.42 Nothing in the pose, props, or set suggests engagement, occupation, or interests. In another example, Kristi Yamaguchi affects a sort of "pinup" pose. An abbreviated skating costume; bent knees; and a billowing, veil-like curtain function socially as a statement of beauty. Presented in this way, the stat- ic and seductive aspects of the skater's pose function to subvert both the active and athletic nature of the sport and the strength and coordination of the skater. Not all books featured in the "READ" posters are in fact identified; but in those in which the titles were vis- ible, females were shown "reading" female authors and males were consis- tently shown holding adult titles by or about males. Together, the book choices function to reify, if not expressly to pro- mote, the idea that boys read about boys and girls read about girls. In addition, male readers appeared more often with copies of adult titles (e.g., travel, biogra- phy, sports, literary classics) and profes- sional reading; women were shown reading children's books, a romance, and a novel. Although it is also true that in two cases males were shown holding books for children and youth {Curious George, The Yearling), both titles fea- tured active "male" protagonists. Many, if not all, of these examples seem to con- firm a gendered discourse in which what is considered "feminine" and "masculine" presents women as roman- tic (and perhaps childlike) and men as serious (and adult) men. The fact that specific titles in the posters are books the celebrities themselves chose does not eliminate their power in reinforcing stereotypes. Rather it serves to show the pervasiveness of gender socialization in America and in the American media. Where celebrity reading choice might signal the power of a feminist agenda, as for example in Winfrey's choice of a book by Zora Neale Hurston, the effect is undermined by the charac- ter of Winfrey's presentation. Indeed it could be argued that embedding femi- nist themes within codes that reinforce gender stereotypes, as can be seen in both the Yamaguchi and Winfrey posters, actually co-opts such themes through a process of commodification. This commodification relegates to the status of "stylistic signifier" what should more properly be considered an ideological argument deserving of a place in the public discourse.43 In spite of the fact that models for Winter 2001
52 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science many of the ALA posters present people of color, they fail to portray any lifestyles other than those that embody white, middle class, cultural traditions. A particularly striking example of what might be considered the hegemonic acculturation of viewers to Anglo- American traditions is the "READ" poster that features the baseball star Bo Jackson. Jackson is shown sitting on a carpeted floor in front of a brick fire- place (a traditional symbol of middle class status and stability) with baseball equipment (denoting action as well as a profession), reading The Old Man and the Sea (an American literary classic). A western reading of this poster would consider the material objects as signi- fiers of status and wealth in a message that claims that successful athletes like to read good books. An oppositional reading might find in the message a sug- gestion that the adoption of the cultural trappings and literary tastes of middle class Euro-American society are prereq- uisites to success and what library users [should] do. To the extent that such a representation appears to valorize or cel- ebrate people of color principally "for having made it in the white world," Ramsey argues that the possibility exists that other cultural traditions may be effectively undermined and devalued, even by those for whom alternative cul- tural patterns are actually a norm.44 Discussion As the traditional voice of the library profession, ALA has been a leader in support of equity issues and literacy ini- tiatives in both their mission statements and their public pronouncements. For this reason, it was ironic to discover that the images and values expressed in pro- motional items that ALA itself produces, and that librarians presumably find both useful and appropriate, express values that may well contradict and subvert these basic concerns. And, while it can be argued that the inclusion of minority celebrities and references to minority authors represent efforts to reclaim minority voice and promote minority use of libraries, the narrow range of cul- tural traditions presented, as well as the manner of minority representation, leave claims to genuine inclusivity open to question. Indeed, the matching of minority authors and titles to minority subjects in celebrity posters suggests subordination and separation rather than parity and inclusion. Cortese suggests that the "equal pres- entation model" in advertising is one common way in which advertisers include minorities in the promotion of an idea or a commodity. This model features "whites and minorities ... in exactly the same way, regardless of any cultural, eco- nomic or physical differences."45 Such an approach, when it effectively suppresses meaningful differences, silences alterna- tive voices and marginalizes alternative viewpoints. Such practices seemed to be suggested in the standardized messages of the "READ" posters. For as Deetz explains, the juxtaposition of a ubiqui- tous and redundant message and the appearance of human agency together serve both to silence individual voices and to mask the ideological producer of the message.46 In a profession that is as feminized as librarianship is in the United States, the possibilities for gender inequity implied in the perpetuation of gender stereotypes in library posters are strik- ing. Theorists with a special interest in youth issues have written extensively of the destructive power of media presen- tations and life experiences that under- mine the development of young girls as active and independent social agents. In this sense, in the failure of posters to provide media models of activity and strength, ALA misses an opportunity to Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 53 disrupt socialization patterns that, according to Pipher, contribute to the depression, obsession, and self-destruc- tive behavior that all too often accompa- ny young girls into middle school and beyond.47 What libraries gain and lose by co- opting icons of popular culture as sym- bols of library use in ways that, at least arguably, perpetuate stereotypes detri- mental to women and minorities, are issues that ought to provoke profession- al interest and discussion. Because of their ubiquity and the redundancy of their messages and format, it seems like- ly the presence of library posters may have receded from conscious awareness. Therefore, the value systems that they seem to represent may contribute to what Boykin and Ellison call "tacit con- ditioning" of climates in which distanc- ing, subordination, invalidation, and disconfirmation of some library users is likely to occur. After all, it is easy to jus- tify withholding resources and services from a population that is considered unworthy.48 According to Hill, for example, the proliferation of negative stereotypes for youth and minorities tends to promote fear of minority youth, which leads to reluctance of people to hire them, wait on them, or provide services for them.49 Stereotypes and enculturation themes have a similar impact on minority youngsters, in particular the possible reinforcement of views, widely shared among minority youngsters, that library use, specifically, as well as other kinds of educational activities, constitute "act- ing white" or "doing the Anglo thing."50 Indeed, Fordham and Ogbu suggest that it is just this sort of image that causes adolescents of color to reject as cultural- ly inappropriate the pursuit of academic goals in general and library use in par- ticular. To the extent that presenting images that construct library users in western cultural ways ensures the non- participation of minority youth, some ALA posters may produce consequences that are the exact opposite of what may have been intended. By the same token, arguing that poverty and violence are individual problems that can be over- come by literacy is to provide a simple answer to an extremely complex prob- lem, while essentially ignoring the structures of hierarchy and power as well as inequality in the distribution of resources and access to knowledge in contemporary society. A discourse that locates the cause of poverty and igno- rance in the individual may in fact pre- clude a discussion of their social causes. In its implied constitution of non- readers as social deviants at best and as irrational urban miscreants at worst, the values expressed in the "Gangbuster" poster tend to legitimate "a social struc- ture within which those who ought to legitimately exercise control are consti- tuted by referencing those who have dif- ficulty controlling themselves."51 According to both Gans and Mokros and Deetz, it is in this way that the dominant culture reinforces its own feelings of superiority and biases at the expense of people who, for whatever reason, do not exhibit the same kinds of behaviors.52 Directions for Research and Implications for Theory Development in US It is hoped that by viewing library posters as elements in a discursive for- mation, those who make environmental choices for libraries, schools, and serv- ice agencies may develop a sensitivity to and an understanding of the processes through which dominant ideologies are produced and reproduced on a daily basis in commercial graphics. Future research studies might consider a more comprehensive examination of all the ALA "READ" posters that have been Winter 2001
54 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science produced over time to see if and to what extent the patterns identified in the present study hold. Another research approach might be to employ Hall's the- oretical framework in investigating alter- nate interpretations of ALA posters by librarians, library users, and nonusers from a variety of cultural traditions and social situations and to consider the consequences of such interpretations for library service and use patterns.53 Because it allows for a considera- tion of the interactional outcomes of the user's experience, the employment of an interpretive-interactionist framework may provide a theoretical grounding for the evaluation of decorative objects and other kinds of artifacts, particularly at sites where the creation of service envi- ronments that provide "positive experi- ences" for users is a matter of concern.54 This examination of library posters also demonstrates the value of communica- tion theory to research problems within the context of LIS, as social structure, social practices, ideology, and culture cannot arise when cognitive approaches are the only ones employed. References and Notes 1. Brenda Dervin and Michael Nilan, "Information Needs and Uses," Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, ARIST 21 (1986): 3-33; Carol C. Kuhlthau, Seeking Meaning (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1993); Nicholas Belkin, "Anomalous States of Knowledge as a Basis for Information Retrieval," Canadian Journal of Information Science 5 (1980): 133-43. 2. Hartmut B. Mokros, Lynn S. Mullins, and Tefko Saracevic, "Practice and Personhood in Professional Interaction: Exploring Social Identities in the Addressing of Information Needs," Library and Information Science Research 17, no. 3 (1995): 237-57. 3. Marie L. Radford, "A Qualitative Investigation of Nonverbal Immediacy in the User's Decision to Approach the Academic Reference Librarian" (paper presented at the Library Research Seminar 1, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Fla., November, 1996); Mary K. Chelton, "Adult-Adolescent Service Encounters: The Library Context" (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 1997). 4. Erving Goffman, Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-to-Face Rehavior (New York: Pantheon Books, 1967); I. Sever, "Children and Territory in a Library Setting," Library and Information Science Research 9, no. 2 (1987): 95-103; Gulten S. Wagner, Public Libraries as Agents of Communication: A Semiotic Analysis (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow, 1992); S. Crumpacker, "The School Library as Place," Wilson Library Rulletin 69, no. 1 (1994): 23-5. 5. Nancy P. Thomas, "Reading Libraries: An Interpretive Study of Discursive Practices in Library Architecture and the Interactional Construction of Personal Identity" (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 1996). 6. J. Potter and M. Wetherell, Discourse and Social Psychology: Reyond Atti- tudes and Rehavior (London: Sage, 1987), 6. 7. Robert Goldman, Reading Ads Socially (New York: Routlege, 1992). 8. John R. Hall and Mary Jo Neitz, Culture: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Putnam, 1994). 9. Jean Barthels, Putting on Appearances: Gender in Advertising (Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Pr., 1988), 35. 10. J. Fiske, Television Culture (London: Routledge, 1987), quoted in E. Graham McKinley, Reverly Hills 90201: Tele- vision, Gender, and Identity (Phila- delphia: Univ. of Pa. Pr., 1997), 258. 11. Jean Kilbourne, Deadly Persuasion (New York: Free Press, 1999); Erving Goffman, Gender Advertisements (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1979). 12. Vivian Gornick, "Introduction," in Erving Goffman, Gender Advertisements, ix. 13. Jean Kilbourne, Deadly Persuasion, 27. 14. George H. Mead, Mind, Self and Society (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1934). 15. Mokros et al., "Practice and Personhood;" Volume 42, Number 1
Unpacking Library Posters 55 Hartmut B. Mokros and Stanley Deetz, "What Counts as Real? A Constitutive View of Communication and the Disenfranchised in the Context of Health," Communication and the Disen- franchised: Social Health Issues and Implications, ed. E. B. Ray (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996), 29^4. 16. Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Com- munication, (Urbana, 111.: Univ. of Illinois Pr., 1949). 17. P. Watzlawick, J. Beavin, and D. D. Jackson, Pragmatics of Human Com- munication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes (New York: Norton, 1967), cited in Mokros et al., "Practice and Personhood." 18. Mokros and Deetz, "What Counts as Real." 19. Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977, ed. and trans. C. Gordon (New York: Pantheon, 1980). 20. Thomas J. Scheff, Microsociology: Discourse, Emotion, and Social Structure (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1990). 21. Bernd Frohmann, "Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and Information Science," Library and Information Science Research 16, no. 2 (1994): 119-38; Mokros et al., "Practice and Personhood"; Radford, "A Qualitative Investigation"; Chelton, "Adult- Adolescent Service Encounters." 22. Gibson Burrell and Gareth Morgan, Sociological Paradigms and Organi- zational Analysis: Elements of the Sociology of Corporate Life (London: Ashgate, 1979); Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Con- struction of Reality (New York: Dou- bleday, 1967); Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research (Chicago: Aldine, 1967). 23. E. M. Gerson and M. S. Gerson, "The Social Framework of Place Perspectives," in Environmental Knowing: Theories, Re- search, and Methods, G. T. Moore and R. G. Golledge, eds. (Stroudsburg, Pa.: Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, 1976), 196-205; Egon G. Guba, Toward a Methodology of Naturalistic Inquiry in Educational Evaluation (Los Angeles, Calif.: Center for the Study of Evaluation, UCLA Graduate School of Education, Univ. of Calif., 1978); Y. F. Tuan, "Literature, Experience, and Environ- mental Knowing," in Environmental Knowing, G. T. Moore and R. G. Golledge, eds., 260-72; E. Relph, "Seeing, Think- ing, and Describing Landscapes," in Environmental Perception and Behavior: An Inventory and Prospect, T. F. Saar- inen, D. Seamon, and J. L. Sell, eds. (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Department of Geography Research Paper No. 209, 1984), 209-23; Thomas J. Scheff, "Part/ Whole Analysis: Towards the Objective Determination of Meaning," in Inter- action and Identity, Hartmut B. Mokros, ed. (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction, 1996), 25-44. 24. Malcolm O. Sillars, Messages, Meanings, and Culture: Approaches to Communi- cation Criticism (New York: Harper- Collins, 1991). 25. L. M. Brown and Carol Gilhgan, Meeting at the Crossroads: Women's Psychology and Girls' Development (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1992), 23. 26. American Library Association, ALA Graphics (Chicago: ALA fall 1994/ winter 1995). 27. Anthony J. Cortese, Provocateur: Images of Women and Minorities in Advertising (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1999). 28. Scheff, "Part/Whole Analysis," 39. 29. R. E. Pittenger, C. F. Hockett, and J. J. Danehy, The First Five Minutes: A Sample of Microscopic Transcription Analysis (Ithaca, N.Y.: Martineau, 1960); Mokros et al., "Practice and Personhood." 30. Fiske, Television Culture. 31. Barthels, "Putting On Appearances." 32. Goffman, Gender Advertisements. 33. R. Hodge and G. Kress, Social Semiotics (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Pr., 1988), 39; S. K. Foss and A. Gill, "Michel Foucault's Theory of Rhetoric as Epistemic," Western Journal of Speech Communication 51, no. 4 (1987): 384- 401. 34. Hodge and Kress, "Social Semiotics," 51. Winter 2001
56 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35. A. W. Boykin and C. M. Ellison, "The Multiple Ecologies of Black Youth Socialization: An Afrographic Anal- ysis," in African-American Youth: Their Social and Economic Status in the United States, ed. R. Taylor (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1995), 122. 36. Ibid. 37. Ibid. Sillars, Messages, Meanings, and Culture, 138, 141. 38. Herbert J. Gans, The War Against the Poor: The Underclass and Anti-Poverty Policy (New York: HarperCollins/Basic Books, 1995). 39. John Berger, Ways of Seeing (London: British Broadcasting Corporation, 1972). 40. Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi and E. Rochberg-Halton, The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self (New York: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1981). 41. Cortese, Provocateur, 59. 42. Gofftnan, Gender Advertisements. 43. Goldman, Reading Ads Socially, 111. 44. P. Ramsey, Teaching and Learning in a Diverse World (New York: Teacher's College Pr., Columbia Univ., 1987), 28. 45. Cortese, Provocateur, 99. 46. Stanley Deetz, Democracy in an Age of Corporate Colonization: Developments in Communication and the Politics of Everyday Ufe (New York: SUNY Pr., 1992); Hodge and Kress, Social Semiotics. 47. Mary Pipher, Reviving Ophelia (New York: Putnam, 1994). 48. Boykin and Ellison, "Multiple Ecolo- gies," 108; Brown and Gilligan, Meeting at the Crossroads. 49. R. H. Hill, "Breaking the Cycle of Disadvantage: Toward a Comprehensive National Policy for Social Intervention," in African-American Youth, ed. R. L. Taylor. 50. S. Fordham and J. U. Ogbu, "Black Student School Success: Coping With the 'Burden of Acting White,'" Urban Review 18, no. 3 (1986): 176-206. 51. Mokros and Deetz, "What Counts as Real," 15. 52. Gans, The War Against the Poor, Mokros and Deetz, "What Counts as Real." 53. Fiske, Television Culture. 54. G. Upah and J. W. Fulton, "Situation Creation in Service Marketing," in The Service Encounter: Managing Employee/ Customer Interaction in Service Busi- nesses, eds. J. A. Czepiel, M. R. Solo- mon, and C. F. Suprenant, (Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1985), 255-63. Volume 42, Number 1