LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" MARION EDMAN1 T HE title for this paper calls to mind a statement attributed to John Ciardi, "Fools give short an- swers to long questions." Certainly ei- ther "literature for children" or "chil- dren without" requires long answers. It becomes increasingly clear as one tries to find published research and to tap the practical experiences of many peo- ple (primarily teachers and librarians) who for long years have tried to bring together the children in culturally de- prived areas with the books in their li- braries and school rooms. The research is pitifully lacking and the reports of experience almost completely contradic- tory. This is a not uncommon frustration in our age when we seem to know the answers, but the questions we do not always know. The discussion of this topic, therefore, might most profitably point the way to questions that must be raised before they can be answered. Only rigorous research, highlighted by carefully evaluated practices in dealing with this special group of children and the ways that will lead them to books and reading, can give us the answers we earnestly seek. This does not discount the honest ef- forts many conscientious librarians and teachers have long been engaged in. Perhaps they were the first to discover what the sociologists and the politicians have recently become excited about: the culturally deprived children in our so- ciety. It is they who have really under- stood the importance of bringing these children into the main stream of Amer- ican life, which the politicians and soci- ologists now believe necessary if this country is to be transformed into the Great Society. There are numerous, generally well- known, sociological descriptions or def- initions of the culturally deprived. It should be pointed out that cultural dep- rivation is not monolithic. This phe- nomenon has many faces and many de- grees. While there are no exact figures on what proportion of children and youth might fall into the category of general deprivation, it is estimated to be between one-fifth and one-third of all our children. The proportion is expected to increase. Many, but not all, live in the inner core of our large cities. De- spite the disadvantages these children may suffer in varying degree, it should be remembered that a considerable number do achieve success in school, graduate from high school (some even go to college), and find a happy place for themselves in adult life. They may find great pleasure in vicarious experi- ences far beyond their own circum- scribed early beginnings, including their pleasure in the use of libraries and books. Because a child grows up in an area where there is no grass, does not mean, ipso facto, that he has become incapable of imagining a world that has luscious green fields. Sam Levinson, who grew up in Harlem, has promised 1 I wish to acknowledge the very considerable help I received from Mr. William Curtis, doctoral student at Wayne State University, who interviewed teachers, librarians, and students in the Detroit area and wlio helped analyze questionnaires and answers from other cities. Thanks are also due the many librarians, teachers, and students who co-operated with us. 32
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 33 to make this point clear in his autobi- ography Everything but Money. Claude Brown, in the story of his childhood in the same city, Manchild in the Prom- ised Land, and Betty Smith in A Tree Grows in Brooklyn have demonstrated that a degrading sociological and eco- nomic environment does not entirely mold the mental and spiritual life of the child. Cultural deprivation may even bring children certain advantages. These children may have seen more of the essential matters of life before they are ten than many more privileged chil- dren will see even as adults. Claude Brown speaks of his own experience: When I was very young-about five years old, maybe younger-I would always be sitting out on the stoop. I remember Mama telling me and Carole to sit on the stoop and not to move away from in front of the door. Even when it was time to go up and Carole would be pulling on me to come upstairs and eat, I never wanted to go, because there was so much out there in that street. You might see somebody get cut or killed. I could go out in the street for an aftemoon, and I would see so much that, when I came in the house, I'd be talking and talking for what seemed like hours. Dad would say, "Boy, why don't you stop that lyin'? You know you didn't see all that. You know you didn't see nobody do that." But I knew I had.2 While Claude Brown does not say in his autobiography that he found books an extension or an explanation of the exciting life he was leading, doubtless there are today, in the slums and in the deprived areas in the rural sections of our country, numberless children who are able and eager to accept much of what we have in the way of books and reading to give them. Certainly many of them will look for greater sophistica- tion in books than do usual children of their age. But it is well known that these children are only a part of the total group, perhaps a small minority, and that it is probably most often this minority who come to the minds of teachers and librarians when they dis- cuss the culturally deprived, for these are the successes in the efforts of these workers. Who among us does not like to think about and talk about his suc- cesses? The culturally deprived for whom books and reading might well be com- pletely out of reach are those who are extremely deficient in their ability to use standard English (the ordinary lan- guage of books); those whose reading skills are so extremely limited that they have come to regard print as almost an exquisite instrument of torture; those whose lives have been so warped that they cannot think of themselves as any- thing but failures, in relation to what they believe society really wants of them; those whose relationships with other persons have been so unsatisfac- tory that they find it difficult, if not im- possible, to identify with real human beings, to say nothing of fictional char- acters. These are the children with whom this paper is concerned. A brief discussion of their handicaps as they seem to relate to the children's ability to understand and to find empathy with literature follows. HANDICAPS OF SPEECH In the area of speech handicaps there is good research. Let me review some of the more significant studies. Two studies by Strickland and Loban have attracted a great deal of attention. The first is a horizontal study, and the sec- ond is a longitudinal study of the actual speech patterns of children, using the techniques of modern recording equip- ment, modern linguistics, and comput- 2 Claude Brown, Manchild in the Promised Land (New York: Macmillan Co., 1965), p. 415.
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ers. While these studies are not solely concerned with the culturally deprived, they do include children from this seg- ment of society, and thus comparison is possible between them and more fa- vored children. Strickland found that practically all children in her sample used a wide range of language patterns but that there were differences in their ability to manipulate the variables. Furthermore, ability to use the variables was signif- icantly related to intelligence, mental age, and the occupational status and education of the parents.3 Loban's study followed the speech development of some 250 individual cases through thirteen years: kinder- garten through twelfth grade. To date two reports of his findings have been published, one for elementary-age chil- dren, one for the junior high level.4 In both reports, Loban established that at all ages studied there was wide varia- tion in children's ability to communi- cate orally. This was reflected in the amount of speech used, range of vocab- ulary, complexity of sentence pattern, fluency, correctness of form, and the occurrence of "language tangles" or mazes. Particularly germane to discus- sion here are his findings relative to un- derprivileged children. Negro children, especially those newly emigrated from the South, had a number of peculiar dif- ficulties, but particularly with the verb "to be." Loban concludes, "At the kin- dergarten level on the omission of aux- iliary verbs, the low Negro group had five times as much difficulty as the low Caucasian group and sixteen times as much difficulty as the high Caucasian group."5 Loban cites numerous other language patterns where the difficulties of Negro children in using standard English are startling and concludes: "Negro chil- dren obviously need to listen and to communicate in situations where they can hear more standard usage-not be- cause standard usage is 'correct' but be- cause standard usage helps to provide access to opportunities and entrance to a wider range of social groups."6 In other words, Negro children, more than any other group, have special need of becoming familiar with the way English is usually spoken and written. Loban's study is also useful in estab- lishing a positive relationship between proficiency in oral language and all oth- er areas of the language arts: reading, writing, listening. He makes a plea for considering skill in speaking and listen- ing the cornerstone of skill in writing and particularly in reading; in fact, he insists that the school must give chil- dren more help in developing facility in oral speech. He makes a special point concerning the culturally deficient child: "The persistently parallel varia- tion of language proficiency and socio- economic status should not be over- looked. It appears entirely possible that language proficiency may be culturally as well as individually determined. If children reared in families at the least favored socio-economic positions re- I Ruth G. Strickland, "Language of Elementary School Children: Its Relationship to the Language of Reading Textbooks and the Quality of Reading of Selected Children," Bulletin of the School of Education, Indiana University, Vol. 38, No. 4 (July, 1962), 131 pp. 'Walter D. Loban, The Language of Elementary School Children ("Research Report," No. 1 [Cham- paign, Ill.: National Council of Teachers of English, 19631), 92 pp., and Loban, Language Ability: Grades Seven, Eight, and Nine ("Co-operative Research Project," No. 131 [Washington: U.S. Office of EdUcation, 1963]), 248 pp. "Ibid., p. 236. ' Ibid., pp. 237-38.
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 35 ceive a restricted language experience, if their early linguistic environment stresses only limited features of lan- guage potential, such children may in- deed be at a disadvantage in the years at school and in the ones beyond school."7 A study of language involving only culturally deprived children of kinder- garten age was made by Dominic Thomas under my direction at Wayne State University. Thomas' conclusions were (1) Culturally different children use a smaller number and variety of words to express themselves. They speak in shorter sentences. (2) They use a much larger proportion of incom- plete sentences. (3) They use a smaller proportion of mature sentences and elaborate constructions. They tend not to elaborate their ideas. (4) They com- mit more errors such as verb and sub- ject not in agreement, colloquialisms and slang, omission of auxiliaries, wrong word order, and misuse of prepositions.8 Numerous other studies similar in scope to those cited might be cited here, but perhaps these suffice to establish the fact that considerable research indicates that culturally deprived children suffer severe handicaps in their use of lan- guage. Does not this research concern- ing the importance of the child's learn- ing oral communication suggest that li- braries, as well as classrooms, become places for talking, as well as reading? Does it not mean that storytelling, read- ing aloud, dramatization, and discuss- ing books in groups become activities of paramount importance? That all sorts of audio-visual stimulation for talking precede attempts to motivate reading? Perhaps in children's libraries, at least, all "Quiet, Please" signs must come down. The research cited does not mean that culturally deprived children cannot communicate effectively in their own society. This they do in a kind of dia- lect that carries all the meaning they wish or need to convey to their listen- ers. Linguists insist that for purposes of communication, any system of language which enables the user to convey mean- ing is a perfectly permissible form of speech. The only trouble with deviation from standard language is that it is not acceptable in all circles and that it often presents barriers to the acceptance of the deviant speaker. Such is the recep- tion given the speech many children bring to school. Worse still, the lan- guage that these children are asked to read is not their language and as such cannot establish communication with them. On many counts, it is almost a foreign tongue: there may be differ- ences of vocabulary, of usage, of pro- nunciation, of stress and rhythm. To the children, however, the books are wrong and they themselves are right, because those individuals who are most important to them use this language. How to deal with such discrepancies between the language of everyday com- munication and the language of books is debatable. There are those who insist that, particularly for the young child, we must begin by writing for him in his own tongue. This practice is illus- trated in some delightful reading mate- rials prepared for Headstart children in Mississippi. Such sentences as these are accepted as perfectly normal Eng- lish: "We been swimming down at the pond"; "Me and Jane killed that ole 'Ibid., p. 241. 'Dominic Thomas, "Oral Language Sentence Structure and Vocabulary of Kindergarten Chil- dren Living in Low Socio-Economic Urban Areas" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Wayne State Uni- versity, 1961).
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY snake"; "This fish got a mouth like a big smile."9 How and when to make the transi- tion from this sort of language to the standard language of literary materials is a subject in need of a great deal of research. The research now available suggests that much work must be done with children's oral speech before change becomes easy. Ruth Golden's efforts in a Detroit high school bears witness to this fact.'0 It seems important to point out one obstacle in initiating a program of pro- ducing and giving the children with deviant language the kind of reading matter that really communicates with them. This is the intransigent position taken by those teachers, librarians, and leaders of minority groups who see the improvement of language as the sine qua non of upward mobility and release from slum status. One linguist of note speaks rather bitingly to teachers on this point: There is one subcultural factor which does affect the language development of these chil- dren, and it is one which I wish to touch on now. This factor is the set of attitudes toward language held by the teachers whom Allison Davis would call "aspiring middle class"-as many teachers are. These attitudes are partly learned in the school and college training of English teachers with its monolithic fixation on "correct English" as the main proper outcome of education in English and the language arts. It is a fixation so deep that it is not felt as a subject for question; it overrides whatever work in child development, educational psy- chology, or methods the teacher may have had, even if these have been more enlightened about language than usual. It is a fixation often nour- ished in the teacher's own sense that only by parting with his origins, learning correct Eng- lish, and moving out of the neighborhood has he been able to cut himself off from the for- eign, rural, or working-class ways of his par- ents. And it frequently expresses itself as a demonstration of real love and concern for the children, that they, too, should come up and out and away from a manner of life that is poverty-stricken, universally condemned, and deadended. Negro teachers especially, insisting that they cannot even understand the children whom they understand only too well, bear down brutally on the divergent phonology, "grammar," and usage of Negro children, com- municating their own tension to the construc- tion of the child's ultimate trauma about lan- guage. In most instances, all the mores of the school sustain them in this unfortunate prac- tice where they should resist it. The alterna- tive to this overemphasis on conformity to "middle class" speech, too, is unfortunate-the idea that the children are so low on the intel- ligence scale that their case is hopeless, and that the most the school can do is prepare them for the same manual occupations their parents engage in, keeping them off the streets and out of trouble as long as possible.1" In summary, then the language dis- ability of the culturally deprived child affects his use of books, perhaps most particularly those of literary value. As Artley points out: Many children are in a position of learning to attach meaning to a printed symbol when the symbol lies outside their spoken vocabulary; to understand a printed ten-word sentence when normally they speak only a disjointed three-word sentence; to interpret a complex sentence when they have difficulty in using simple ones; to follow the organization of a new story they are trying to read when they are unable to tell in logical order the events in I "Pond, Mississippi Action for Community Edu- cation" (Edwards, Miss.: Mace Press, n.d. [mimeo- graphed]). 10 Ruth I. Golden, "Ways to Improve Oral Communication of Culturally Different Youth," in Arno Jewett, Joseph Mersand, and Doris V. Gunderson (eds.), Improving English Skills of Culturally Different Youth in Large Cities ("U.S. Office of Education Bulletin," No. 5 [Washington: U.S. Office of Edcucation, 19641), pp. 100-109. " Donald Lloyd, "Subcultural Patterns Which Affect Language and Reading Ability," in Arno Jewett, Joseph Mersand, and Doris V. Gunderson (eds.), Improving English Skills of Culturally Dif- ferent Youth in Large Cities ("U.S. Office of Edu- cation Bulletin," No. 5 [Washington: U.S. Office of Education, 1964]), pp. 117-18.
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 37 the familiar "Little Red Riding Hood"; to read complete sentences with expression when they are unable to give emphatic expression to their own ideas; to interpret punctuation marks when they attach no significance to gesture, pantomimes and free play.12 Do not these studies of the modern linguists, with their insistence that we respect the language of all children, no matter how "bad," and that we learn to regard their speech as legitimate communication, place upon teachers and librarians the responsibility to de- mand of authors and publishers the kind of language in books which these children really use? Do the studies not further suggest that we might carefully consider our attitudes toward "proper" language? And, finally, do they not lay upon us the burden of discovering the techniques whereby the gradual transi- tion from "slum" language to "accept- able" norms of speech is accomplished? Does this not all add up to the propo- sition that we help these children to become, in effect, bilingual? HANDICAPS OF POOR READING SKILLS It should be noted that for those chil- dren who have not mastered the basic reading skills, books of any sort are to be avoided because all they can do is to give the child a sense of shame and defeat. While the contention of modern reading experts that "Johnny really can read" is true, it is equally true that an appalling number of chil- dren are so handicapped in reading ability that they must be classed, at best, as semiliterate. In a recent news- paper release of reading levels for a high school in a depressed area of De- troit, the Board of Education indicated that in a graduating class of 260 seniors only 50 were reading at grade level on the standardized reading test given at the school.'3 One might well ask what kinds of books the students in such situations might read with guidance and help from teachers, what sorts of books librarians could beguile them into tak- ing for voluntary and recreational read- ing. Even though the tests given might not be a fair measure of each child's real ability, and certainly not of his potential as a reader, harm has been done in establishing a label for him as an inadequate reader, of which he him- self is more or less painfully aware. While there is a paucity of research that is truly diagnostic in determining the real causes why the culturally dis- advantaged child usually has such tremendous problems in learning to read, one fact seems quite clear and that is, as was pointed out earlier, that he has not begun reading with materials that make sense to him, either in lan- guage or in subject matter. He has never looked upon reading in terms of my favorite definition for that complex process-a child's definition: "Reading is talk wrote down." A reading program in any language, at any stage in a student's career, is likely to be effective to the degree that it parallels the language habits that the student has acquired in speaking. In terms of the language usage of all chil- dren in relation to reading, many ques- tions concerning needed research have been raised. One writer in the field lists these: (1) What is the process of learning to read, in linguistic and socio- logical terms? (2) What is dialectology? (3) What is the general dialectical situ- ation in American English? (4) How 12A. Sterl Artley, "Oral Language Growth and Reading Ability," Elementary School Journal, 53 (February, 1953), 321. 13 The Detroit News, May 1, 1966, p. 1.
38 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY does this situation affect the problem of the teacher? (5) How much do we know about regional kinds of dialect differences in American English? How much more can we hope to know? (6) How do these differences as we know them affect the problem of reading in the American dialectical situation?'4 Has the time now come when the children's librarian, traditionally co- operative with teachers in schools, be provided with an additional staff mem- ber: namely, a person trained, not as a librarian, but as an expert who can analyze children's specific reading prob- lems and who can analyze the difficul- ties that certain types of reading mat- ter give him? In response to a question- naire the writer sent librarians working with culturally deprived children, over and over the librarians said, "These children need individual help and guid- ance." However, librarians are not trained as reading specialists. An ex- pert, such as the one proposed, might be able to co-ordinate, more effectively than is now possible, the efforts made by school and library to give children mastery of those basic skills, without which reading of any sort is impossible. PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL HANDICAPS But language is not the only area where the child needs to feel empathy with what he finds in books. Perhaps the psychological and sociological factors involved are far more important than the linguistic ones. The observation has already been made that because of his background the culturally deprived child may be far more sophisticated about some things than are normal chil- dren of his age. Are the pictures he sees, the characters he meets, the situations presented ones that he can understand and find meaning and delight in? With such questions in mind, several school systems have taken great pains to pre- pare special materials for the culturally deprived, sometimes with happy, some- times with disastrous, results. One program involving the careful preparation of special reading mate- rials for culturally deprived children in Detroit has been described by Gertrude Whipple.'5 Careful consideration was given general content, characters, il- lustrations, stories, vocabulary, and the teacher's manual. These books thus prepared have now been used with ap- parent success through the second grade and hopefully will prevent many children from becoming crippled read- ers even at the earliest levels.'6 To what age levels such contrived material can be used successfully is not yet known. Much of the work done along these lines, however, has been based on faith rather than on exhaustive research. Does the culturally deprived child gain more from reading that which gives him better understanding of his own world with its real, raw problems of life, ex- citing and challenging as they are, or should he learn to live vicariously in an entirely strange world of order and re- spectability, often (to his taste) hum- drum and placid? Here the basic ques- tion of what our society wants of the culturally deprived becomes para- " Raven I. McDavid, "Dialectology and the Teaching of Reading," Reading Teacher, 18 (De- cember, 1964), 206-13. 1" City Schools Reading Program (4 vols.; Chi- cago: Follett Publishing Co., 1963). 16 Gertrude Whipple, "The Culturally and Social- ly Deprived Reader," in H. Alan Robinson (ed.), The Underachiever: Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Reading Held at the University of Chicago, 1962 ("Supplementary Educational Monographs," No. 92 [Chicago: University of Chi- cago Press, 1962]), pp. 129-36.
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 39 mount: is it greater conformity by mak- ing more people middle class in values and habits or is it to play up the strengths of lower-class life, while min- imizing its pain and vulgarity? Claude Brown, whose Manchild in the Promised Land was mentioned earlier, is one who is still earnestly seeking an answer to this basic question: Everybody I knew in Harlem seemed to have some kind of dream. I didn't have any dreams, not really. I didn't have any dreams for hitting the number. I didn't have any dreams for getting a big car or a fine ward- robe. I bought expensive clothes because it was a fad. It was the thing to do, just to show that you had money. I wanted to be a part of what was going on, and this was what was going on. I didn't have any dreams of becoming any- thing. All I knew for certain was that I had my fears. I suppose just about everybody else knew the same thing. They had their dreams, though, and I guess that's what they had over me. As time went by, I was sorry for the peo- ple whose dreams were never realized.l7 THE HANDICAP OF A POOR SELF-IMAGE An important factor in their develop- ment of values and goals in life is the kind of self-image children form. In their excellent discussion of ego development among segregated Negro children, Ausubel and Ausubel report the consequences of factors that pre- vent the growth of normal human rela- tionships and a feeling of inner-self worth for this type of youngster. The segregated Negro child often refuses to identify himself with his own group, be- cause he believes his group is accorded little worth in general society.'8 He bene- fits little or nothing of derived status from his parents, and so early he associ- ates himself with a peer group, where his activities are often unsuppressed. Here he experiences a freedom that middle- class children rarely have and develops a sure sense of independence; however, he ordinarily feels no great drive for academic success, although he often ex- presses unrealistically high vocational interests, which may not really be his true or functional level of striving. In general, he misses those "supportive traits [that] include habits of initiative and responsbility, the 'deferred gratifi- cation' pattern of hard work, renuncia- tion of immediate pleasures, long-range planning, high frustration tolerance, impulse control, thrift, punctuality and willingness to undergo prolonged voca- tional preparation."'9 Sexual differences in these matters are more pronounced for Negro chil- dren than for white because the Negro family pattern is more predominantly matriarchal. Bowman reports four neg- ative aspects of the child's self-image in school: a sense of failure, alienation from people, a feeling of always being treated unfairly, and finally, hopeless- ness concerning the future.20 Bowman lists five characteristics of a good school program that can help heal the bruised egos that the culturally deprived often bring to the learning tasks set for them, but none of his remedies indicates any part that the right books can play in this healing process. There are those who feel that school and formal attempts at education of any sort, as presently constituted, do 17 Brown, op. cit., p. 414. " David Ausubel and Pearl Ausubel, "Ego De- velopment among Segregated Negro Children," in A. Harry Passow (ed.), Education in Depressed Areas (New York: Bureau of Publications, Teach- ers College, Columbia University, 1963), pp. 109- 41. '9Ibid., p. 118. 20 Paul H. Bowman, "Improving the Pupil Self- Concept," in Robert D. Strom (ed.), The Inner City Classroom: Teacher Behaviors (Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Books, 1966), pp. 75-91.
40 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY more to increase than to alleviate the feelings of insecurity and inferiority that the culturally deprived child brings with him as he enters into contact with this segment of his world. A recent book describing this process is titled Edutca- tion for Alienation.21 Many psycholo- gists and sociologists insist that the kin- dergarten child from the slums is a far healthier individual in his personal and interpersonal relationships than he will be at any later stage of his school life. If this unhappy situation is now true and is to be reversed, what shall be the role of books? Is it by identifying with others in like trouble or is it by identi- fying with individuals who were suc- cesses that these children gain a more favorable perspective of themselves and their rightful place in the society? Should this identification be with their own race or minority group? Should it be with those whose achievements are within the realm of possibility for them- selves or with those who were the par- ticularly fortunate unfortunates? An- swers to these questions seem now in the realm of the unknown. Here is prob- ably the area where librarians can help most, but perhaps they will need the assistance of trained psychologists. THE UNIVERSALITY OF CHILDREN'S INTERESTS All studies of the general interests of culturally deprived children show that they do not vary markedly from those of so-called normal children. They en- joy television and look at the same pro- grams. They laugh at humorous sit- uations; they understand tragic and disappointing ones. They can be led, with appropriate methods, to enjoy rhyme and rhythm, stories of adven- ture, stories of animals, stories of real life. In other words, their interests are as broad as life and as wide as the sub- jects dealt with in books. The key to success here is now, as it has ever been, the interested and resourceful librarian who makes a real study of getting the right book to the right child. A real problem is how to multiply the number of such librarians available to children. THE PLACE OF LITERATURE Just exactly what literature should be provided for the culturally deprived child is still a debatable matter among teachers and librarians. For this reason, the following definition of literature for children will be used: that body of chil- dren's books which, in the combined judgments of teachers and librarians, has been included in the lists compiled by respected and reputable professional organizations such as the ALA, NCTE, ACEI, and others. These lists include books of a wide variety of formats, dealing with a wide variety of topics and certainly far from equal in that elu- sive quality, "good literary style." These are the books found on the shelves of the average public library, the books in the school library or the classroom, the books that are being pur- chased for the special projects now be- ing set up for the culturally deprived. These are the materials now available for use with children. It is to our advantage, in dealing with culturally deprived children, that we have a broad spectrum of materials from which to choose rather than a nar- row range of materials that somehow have been labeled "real" literature. Our clientele presents too broad a spectrum of special problems to be encompassed narrowly. It may well be that research will indicate that we need an even 'Nathaniel Hickerson, Education for Alienation (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1966).
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 41 broader range of materials than we now have and that many books must be written with the culturally deprived particularly in mind: special subject matter, special language, special for- mat, special illustrations. These will not be inferior materials, because they will be written by talented authors who are particularly sensitive to the needs of this large segment of our society and who will consciously make use of the extensive research of linguistics, read- ing experts, sociologists, and psycholo- gists now available. But for here and now we must try to make optimal use of what materials we have: this is the best we can do. The remainder of this paper de- scribes some ways in which teachers and librarians are introducing literature to culturally deprived children and which practices seem to be bringing re- sults. It is assumed that the work of teachers and librarians, whether public or school librarians, is basically the same, for both groups are seriously con- cerned with helping children to find meaning and pleasure in books. No at- tempt will be made to mention specific titles. Many excellent lists are in exist- ence, some of which have been devel- oped for special projects dealing with the culturally deprived.22 THE UNIQUE CONTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE One should, however, point out the importance of one role that literature, in its narrower definition, should play in the reading experience of children. Perhaps its unique function is to pre- sent a pattern for the development of those personal and interpersonal values commonly accepted as ideal in our cul- ture.23 The understanding that such values exist and that they have gener- ally proved satisfying to human beings may be the greatest need of children without. If this be true, there is some evidence that current writers of chil- dren's books sidestep the presentation of such values. Chambers found in his study of the output of two major pub- lishing houses for one year that the books he analyzed were typically amor- al in the themes with which they dealt.24 It is likewise true that authorities in the field are often in disagreement concern- ing the validity of the values that an author attempts to present. Such is the case of The Empty School House.25 Per- haps it is not surprising then that gen- eral disagreement exists as to what these children need, what materials will meet their needs, and what the young- sters can and will read. We must have further and continuing dialogue on these matters. READING INTERESTS AND HABITS OF CHILDREN It is striking to note that little has been done to identify the specific read- ing preferences of various groups of 2 Gateway English: Development of Reading and English Language Materials for Grades 7-9 in Depressed Urban Areas (New York: Hun- ter College of the City University of New York Curriculum Study Center, October, 1965). 'May Hill Arbuthnot, "Developing Life Values through Reading," Elementary English, 43 (Janu- ary, 1966), 10-16. ' Dewey Chambers, "An Exploratory Study into the Social Values in Children's Literature" (un- published Ph.D. dissertation, Wayne State Univer- sity, 1965). 'Compare Shelton L. Root, Jr.'s review (Ele- mentary English, 43 [April, 1966], 433-35) of The Empty School House, by Natalie S. Carlson (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), with comments on the same book by Arna Bontemps, "Uncle Remus, Farewell," Bookweek, Fall Children's Issue (October 31, 1965), p. 3.
42 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY children.20 We have many suggestions from authorities in the field but little or no evidence to support it. Norvell, re- porting on the reading preferences of 24,000 students in the fourth, fifth, and sixth grades in New York, found a marked difference in what children preferred and what experts recom- mended.27 If such disparity between what chil- dren like and what experts think they should like is true for "average" chil- dren, what credence can be placed in opinions regarding the reading interests and habits of the culturally different? In attempting to answer this question, I submitted a brief questionnaire to li- brarians who work with culturally de- prived children. These were the ques- tions: 1. Is there any evidence that certain formats in books appeal particularly to these chil- dren: large print, many pictures, limited size, pages broken with wide margins, short paragraphs, etc? 2. What sorts of language barriers seem to inhibit their reading: vocabulary, many proper names, sentence structure, idioms, dialect of various kinds? 3. Do children of minority groups like to read about traditional figures representing their own group? About "real live heroes" of their group who have succeeded? Do they like pictures of their own race? 4. What kinds of humor appeal to these chil- dren? What kinds, if any, appeal particu- larly to Negro children? 5. Do they seem to prefer idealistic materi- als such as fairy tales and fantasy or, rather, realistic stories of real children in real-life settings? 6. Do they show any preference for stories laid in the urban living they know best rather than in settings quite unfamiliar to them? 7. Does television viewing seem to influence reading? Do the adult television programs that many of these children watch, with their emphasis on adult adventure and violence, seem to have much influence? 8. Do these children follow the usual sexual differences of boys and girls in their read- ing interests, despite the fact that many of them are precocious in their knowledge of sex? 9. Do they show any interest in special liter- ary art forms such as poetry or drama? 10. Can you honestly say slum children are a distinct reading group, or do they repre- sent all the individual differences to be found in any "normal" group of children? The most striking result obtained from this questionnaire was that there is no general agreement on answers to the questions asked among librarians who work almost solely with the cul- turally deprived in many different cities of the country; however, a few facts did become apparent as the interviews progressed and the questionnaires were analyzed. One was that all children with limited experience in reading, or those having reading difficulties, tend to choose picture books with large illustra- tions and a minimum amount of text. If this is typically characteristic of the disadvantaged child, then an emphasis on the picture book is not only impor- tant for the early reader but also for children at upper elementary and jun- ior high levels. We must, therefore, re- consider our practice of placing all the picture books in one place for the younger child. Poor readers recognize that such titles are the baby books; thus, the non-reading older child will be found at the magazine rack looking at picture books for adults, rather than choosing what might be more suited to his interest and taste. Another matter of some agreement is ' Jean M. Lepere, "Review of Research in Children's Literature," A Review of Educational Research, 31 (1961), 179-87. 27 George W. Norvell, What Boys and Girls Like To Read (Morristown, N.J.: Silver-Burdett Co., 1958), 306 pp.
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 43 the interest of minority groups in read- ing specifically about themselves. Most of the experts, however, insisted that all groups in our society should be rep- resented in books. In essence, these books should realistically portray our society today if the book is concerned with the present. All children like a good, adventurous hero regardless of origin. Illustrations should be true to the situation and mood. Some librarians identified humor and nonsense books as being specifically of interest to these children, especially Negro children. Others objected and said no such preference could be discerned. All children like a funny story or non- sense book. Statistics on attendance and circula- tion figures for children's rooms are not available in Detroit, and the question- naire to other cities did not include this question, but Countee Cullen library in New York was able to report a sharp rise in library use when the staff was expanded.28 This is significant because the cry is usually for more books and materials. The implication here is what is needed is a more effective job with what is available. One example cited by Countee Cullen librarians is the stress placed on local community organiza- tions to encourage reading as a habit among disadvantaged youngsters. School visits, reading clubs, guest speakers, and community groups have stimulated a new interest in reading at Countee Cullen; this all demands an expanded staff and a reappraisal of the role of libarian. As was indicated ear- lier, perhaps in slum areas, librarians are more important than books, since it is only through guidance to the right books that many of these children will dare to attempt any reading at all, to say nothing of developing the habit of turning to books for profit and pleas- ure. Furthermore, all agencies inter- ested in the slum child need to cooper- ate in encouraging him to read. Reaffirmation of this viewpoint came while interviewing ninth, tenth, and eleventh grade boys in the "Upward Bound" program at Cranbrook School near Detroit.29 These boys, who are cer- tainly characteristic of children with- out, continually reiterated that they fre- quented only those libraries where the librarian was a sympathetic guide for their interests. Whether it was home- work or reading for pleasure, they iden- tified with the library where encourage- ment and interest were apparent on the part of a librarian. Some indicated that no place like this was available and therefore they did not use the library. Good picture books, easy text, high interest, universal heroes, realistic sit- uations: these are the materials that li- brarians say they need. Expanded, in- terested staff who make extended com- munity contacts and who are creative and particularly sympathetic with the peculiar problems of children without are needed to get these materials into circulation. In addition to librarians, perhaps other highly trained workers are needed if the library staff is to deal effectively with children without. TEACHING METHODS AND MATERIALS Just as the traditional librarian must be remade to fit the new situations, so must the traditional teacher of litera- ture, both in the materials used and in the methods followed, if he wishes to reach this type of child. The old "clas- sics" will hardly do. While being inter- 28 "Saturday's Children," Library Journal, 91 (March, 1966), 1581-90. ' Personal interviews with boys at Cranbrook, July 15, 1966.
44 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY viewed, the boys at Cranbrook fre- quently mentioned the titles currently being read in their English classes: Catcher in the Rye and Bridge over the River Kwai. They were not only read- ing and discussing these books but were excited by them. Again and again the boys mentioned that Catcher in the Rye is about them and their world, that Bridge over the River Kwai is an excit- ing book. It is important to note that these boys had all been tested and found to be reading far below grade level. Most of them were eleventh graders, but some were as low as fourth grade in reading skills. One was so low that he registered no grade level at all on the test used. It is likewise important to know that in this experiment classes are small and that teachers are well trained and en- thusiastic about helping these boys suc- ceed. Much time is spent in oral activi- ties. While many high schools in many cities have developed special reading materials and suitable methods for pre- senting these materials, one of special merit has been worked out for the high schools in New York City. In an out- line showing how methodology must be suited to characteristics of slow learn- ers, many of the problems of the cul- turally deprived are covered (although all slow children do not fall into the category of the deprived). Such hints as these are given to teachers: select varied materials that are not too long and that are in line with youngsters' reading skills, interests, and experi- ences; work on skills needed for under- standing; stress experience values in literature rather than literary forms or values; use audio-visual aids, reading by the teacher, class dramatizations, and television to make verbalization con- crete; stress successes no matter how small; be generous with praise; make assignments short and concrete.30 A teacher in the New York City schools has described his success in finding books that made sense to cul- turally deprived children in terms of their own special concerns. The advice the children seem to be giving their teachers about books was summed up in four points: 1. The subject had to be worth it to us. We like books about animals, aviation, careers, hobbies, sports, the sea, westerns. We love lots of adventure, plenty of excitement, slews of interesting facts about science and things. 2. You couldn't treat us like babies. We may not be so "hot" as readers, but that doesn't mean, if you give us an easy book about ducks on a farm, we'll cackle over it gleefully. We had that stuff in the third grade-remember? 3. You had to give us lots of good pictures, good drawings, and big print. As one of the fellows said, "I can't read when the print on page is so small. After a while I lose my eye- sight." 4. You had to know how to write. Maybe the guy who likes to read a lot will stand for some boring parts, but not us! If you want us to read don't beat around the bush; come riglht to the point. Give us a story that pushes us to go on to the next page and the next page, and you're in!31 The fact that teachers, as well as li- brarians, are particularly concerned about these children and are developing special methods for helping them should mean that even closer working relations between school and library will be planned. For these children, more than 3 Joseph Mersand, "Teaching the Slow Learner in English," High Points, 49 (May, 1966), 38-53. 31Charles Spiegler, "Reading Materials for Retarded Readers," in Helen M. Robinson (ed.), Materials for Reading: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of Reading field at the University of Chicago, 1957 ("Supplementary Educational Monographs," No. 86 [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957]), p. 29.
LITERATURE FOR "CHILDREN WITHOUT" 45 other children, the right hand should know what the left hand is doing to try to help them. In conclusion, then, what do we make of the fact that we have in our society a considerable number of children whom we designate as children without? What do we wish to give them that books can supply? In a recent editorial discussing the computer age and what it might mean for man, Norman Cousins speaks of the role of the poet, the man of lit- erature, in our total society: "The poet reminds men of their uniqueness. It is not necessary to possess the ultimate definition of this uniqueness. Even to speculate on it is a gain."32 One main question now becomes crystal clear. How shall the books we give him help encourage the child who is without many of the trappings and certainly without some of the values and life patterns we hold dear in our society but who still possesses many ideals that have value for human life? How shall these books help him and us to cherish his uniqueness and special worth in our society? Claude Brown reminds us that even in the murkiest slums people have their aspirations. He says, "Everybody I knew in Harlem seemed to have some kind of dream."33 We teachers and li- brarians can only ask a question in re- ply: "What books can we find for cre- ating finer dreams and for making these dreams come true for children that fate has given little but dreams to live by?" 32 Norman Cousins, "The Computer and the Poet," Saturday Review (July 23, 1966), p. 42. 33Brown, op. cit., p. 414.