On April 11, 2014, the College of Information Studies at the University of Maryland hosted the 2014 Symposium on Diversity and Library and Information Science Education. This was the second symposium in what is now planned to be an annual event. The symposium brings together researchers, professionals, students, and administrators to discuss approaches and strategies to educating library and information science (LIS) students and LIS professionals on how to be inclusive and culturally competent practitioners. The symposium approaches diversity and inclusion as broad issues, including race, ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic status, education, ability, language, literacy, geography, and orientation, among others. With challenges such as Internet access, digital literacy, and digital inclusion being central both to library missions and to the needs of community members, meeting the needs of diverse populations and promoting inclusion are at the very heart of much of the contemporary work of libraries. The 2014 symposium was sponsored by the Information Policy and Access Center (iPAC) of the University of Maryland and the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) and was cochaired by Paul Jaeger, John Carlo Bertot, and Mega Subramaniam (the three are serving as editors of the current special issue). Complete details of the event can be found at http://ipac.umd.edu/news-and-events/university-maryland-successfully-hosts-2nd-diversity-is-education-symposium. Videos of the talks have been posted at https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCahG9uAhcmoUtu-hIv12Xnw. This year’s theme was “Advocacy, Outreach, and Inclusion.” The symposium featured talks, presentations, panels, and discussions on the formal and informal education of LIS professionals in relation to diversity and inclusion, as well as the roles of library professionals as educators for diversity and inclusion in their communities. Among the more than 160 registrants from all across the United States were LIS deans, faculty, and students; directors, administrators, and staff of libraries, museums, and archives; staff of nonprofits and government agencies; and diversity professionals. The total number of registrants for the 2014 symposium was slightly higher than the total for the first symposium, indicating a clear and significant interest in sharing ideas about diversity and inclusion in LIS education and professional practice. A previous special issue of Library Quarterly (vol. 83, no. 3) featured papers from the first symposium. This special issue of Library Quarterly presents some of the many highlights of the 2014 symposium, with speakers converting their talks into articles that convey their key messages. In this issue: • Samantha Hastings explores the ways in which LIS educators and professionals can work to ensure that in the future our library and information professionals can be representative of the populations they serve. • Denice Adkins, Christina Virden, and Charles Yier detail the interrelated roles of LIS education and LIS professional groups in promoting diversity. • Paul Jaeger, Nicole Cooke, Cecilia Feltis, Michelle Hamiel, Fiona Jardine, and Katie Shilton detail a series of projects in LIS courses and library services to foster the social justice impacts of library activities in the communities they serve. • Jonathan Lazar and Irene Briggs describe innovative efforts to improve equity of access to digital-based resources in one library system. • Fiona Jardine and Erin Zerhusen explore the roles of student organizations in promoting diversity in LIS education. • Mark Brimhall-Vargas meditates on the unique ways in which libraries promoteinclusion in their communities. The speakers reflected the broad range of attendees, and many different educational approaches, institutions, and perspectives were represented. In addition to the talks, the symposium featured a student poster session to showcase the work of young professionals and scholars interested in issues of diversity and inclusion. The symposium also bridged these discussions to recognition of achievement in diversity among LIS professionals and students. The James A. Partridge Outstanding African American Information Professional Award was presented to Janet Sims-Wood by the Citizens for Maryland Libraries and the College of Information Studies at the University of Maryland. Thanks to a generous gift from Maryland alumna Simmona Simmons, a new award was also created. The College of Information Studies at the University of Maryland will now be able to present the Simmona Simmons Best Student Paper on Diversity Award each year. The number of attendees demonstrates the vital importance of this symposium in driving discussions of diversity and inclusion in LIS education, research, and practice. Yet some people have raised questions about the need for the event. A few have claimed that LIS is long past having to worry about challenges relating to diversity and inclusion, believing that these problems were fixed a long time ago—or were never concerns to begin with—and that we do not need to discuss them anymore. In the same way that many people in popular media and popular culture speak of a “postracial,” “postgender,” or “postdisability” world, some in LIS seem to be seeking a way to avoid addressing significant challenges of difference, exclusion, and privilege by trying to wish them away. The perpetual underrepresentation of certain groups in LIS students, faculty, and professionals—including such sizable populations as African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, and people with disabilities—has been well documented over a long period (for an overview, see Jaeger, Bertot, and Franklin [2010]; Jaeger et al. [2011]). Similarly, most LIS education programs and research have given limited attention to diversity and inclusion (for recent data, see Jaeger et al. [2010]; Mestre [2010]; Subramaniam and Jaeger [2010, 2011]), which is particularly surprising for a profession with the mission to provide equal service to all. As an example, consider LIS education and diversity-related courses. Approximately 80% of graduates of LIS programs feel that they never had a chance to take a single elective related to diversity or inclusion (Mestre 2010). Among the diversity and inclusion courses offered by LIS programs, the vast majority are electives, most of which are offered infrequently (Subramaniam and Jaeger 2011). Furthermore, such classes are far less likely to exist at LIS programs with larger enrollments—particularly iSchools (Subramaniam and Jaeger 2010). Although some LIS programs make diversity a core part of their curriculum (Jaeger et al. 2010; Jaeger, Bertot, and Subramaniam 2013), most offer no more than a token elective related to diversity and inclusion. Such a lack of focus in the curriculum demonstrates the overall lack of attention that diversity and inclusion tend to receive in LIS education and research. Although some libraries have amazing projects and programs that reach, serve, and advocate for underserved and underrepresented populations in their communities, the great majority of LIS graduates are not prepared in these areas by their degree programs, and many libraries do not provide these types of programs and services. This perhaps is due in part to the fact that staff members may not have been sufficiently prepared by their education to work in these areas, and they may remain ill prepared as professionals. There are very strong and pressing reasons for the Symposium on Diversity and Library and Information Science Education and other forums for better addressing issues of diversity and inclusion across LIS professions, education, research, and practice. One of those reasons can be found in the attitudes of some LIS professionals, whose views have even made their way into published LIS literature. A perfect example of these attitudes was seen among the new books for the review section of the journal just a few days after the symposium. Crash Course in Dealing with Difficult Library Customers (Libraries Unlimited, 2014) by Shelley E. Mosley, Dennis C. Tucker, and Sandra Van Winkle is part of a series of quick reference guides for library professionals, with titles devoted to topics such as story time, genealogy, and administration issues. The books in this series are designed to be references to have on hand in any library, meaning that they will be read by and influence the practice of many library professionals. In theory, having a quick reference book on dealing with difficult situations seems perfectly reasonable, as there are a large number of potential problems that can occur when interacting with members of the public in any setting. Being prepared to deal with issues of criminality or safety is, of course, a very good idea. This particular book, however, presents a rather alarming portrait of the ways in which librarians might view and interact with their communities. The ultimate goal of focusing on diversity and inclusion issues in LIS education, research, and practice is to make a library and its professionals a more integrated part of the community that they serve. That means being a member of the community, being knowledgeable about the community and the various populations it comprises, and being welcoming to all populations in that community. Those focused on diversity and inclusion in LIS try to prepare students to work effectively with diverse populations so that they are able to make the library a truly inclusive environment. This book, in contrast, paints the job of the librarian as one of exclusion by labeling a surprisingly wide variety of groups as “difficult” or “problematic.” Although there is a nod to cultural diversity and a few brief paragraphs in the general guidelines encouraging librarians not to stereotype, the included definition of stereotyping is primarily restricted to “those who dress differently than mainstream America,” and readers are reminded that just because someone has “piercings and tattoos doesn’t mean that they’re in the library to hurt you” (2). The overall tone of the book is condescending, with snarky section titles that mock their subjects (e.g., “Vandals: This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things” or “Smelly People: The Hygiene Deficient and Other Stinky Patrons”). This tone would undercut the seriousness of the book but for the fact that the assemblage of “problem” groups is, quite simply, bewildering. Patrons who are indecisive, “shy, quiet mumblers,” and those who are self-important are given the same level of significance as abusers and arsonists. Many descriptions of the problem groups are simply complaints about the changing nature of working in a library, particularly the more prominent social service roles that libraries have been taking on over the past decade. The unemployed, the homeless, and those seeking to apply for government benefits are singled out as problem groups. Regarding these particular groups, the book showcases an exclusionary streak present in some parts of the library community. The homeless are deemed “problems” both for having nowhere to stay and, in a separate section, for being “smelly.” Perhaps the oddest section explains how the unemployed are a danger to children. By far the most disturbing section is the one on mentally ill patrons. Although it is important for library staff to be aware of potential warning signs, the descriptions of common mental illnesses are outdated, insensitive, and in some cases inaccurate. It should be noted that there are no citations indicating the origins of the seemingly “clinical” descriptions. In one example, the authors actually equate intellectual disabilities—“a 50-something woman with the mental abilities of a 4-year old”—with mental illness (78). People with disabilities and mental illnesses are presented as monsters, including the jarring and wildly incorrect assertion that people with obsessive-compulsive disorder are physically violent and even a reference to one patron as “Ms. Hyde.” The language throughout the text is decidedly “us” (the librarians) versus “them” (the patrons). Inclusivity in the form of customer service is given lip service, but the overwhelming attitude is one of exclusivity. Unfortunately, such attitudes are far from uncommon among library professionals. An excellent article by Lynn Westbrook (2015)—which was recently published in Library Quarterly—about the resistance of some librarians to helping patrons in areas of social service demonstrates the strength and depth of these attitudes among some in our field. It is one thing not to want arson occurring in the library; it is a very different thing not to want people searching for a job in the library. At their core, such complaints reflect a rejection of the inclusive mission of libraries. The Symposium on Diversity and Library and Information Science Education—and all other education, research, and professional initiatives related to better preparing LIS students and professionals to be inclusive practitioners—are vital to the future of the field because of this inclusive mission. Services to people who need help finding a job, learning digital literacy skills, getting government assistance, or finding shelter are all parts of serving the community. The message clearly still needs to be proclaimed loudly if the Crash Course book is any indication. Across the articles in this special issue of Library Quarterly, the authors discuss ideas, initiatives, and programs that are devoted to the goal of inclusive service to the community and preparation of LIS students and professionals to be culturally competent and socially engaged community members. As the country becomes more diverse and there are fewer community institutions providing social support, the future of libraries and library professionals is inextricably linked with diversity and inclusion. In her article in this issue, Samantha Hastings rightly asserts that “encouraging diversity is one of the most important things we do as educational institutions.” Considerations of inclusion, access, human rights, and social justice need to be guiding our approach to working with community members rather than belief in the exclusion of those who do not fit the notion of an idealized patron from long ago.