A Popular Culture Studies and Library Education Gordon Stevenson A course in popular culture was offered at the School of Library and Information Science, State University of New York at Albany, for the first time in the summer of 1972. The course provided an unusu- al opportunity to explore certain dimen- sions of communications processes, librarianship, and the cultural environ- ment of libraries that, though not neces- sarily new to the curriculum, needed a sharper focus. After several experimental versions, Lib. 617: Popular Culture and the Library was added to the curriculum as a regular elective course. In the school's printed catalog, it is described as follows: "Lib. 617. The nature and social functions of the contemporary popular culture as disseminated by the mass media; the relationship between the popular culture and the library. Bibliographic sources, selection and acquisition problems."1 Among other things, the course asks students to seriously consider the proposition that the information trans- mitted by such popular culture figures as Rod McKuen, Aretha Franklin, the Beatles, Tarzan (and Jane), Archie Bunker, and Georgette Heyer is as important as the information that flows through channels serving scientists and scholars. Some of my colleagues have responded to this suggestion with inter- est and sympathy, others with bemused silence or stunned incredulity. The fol- lowing account of some of the thinking that went into the course at Albany will try to demonstrate that popular culture is a profoundly significant part of the total informational environment in which we all live and work, and that a study of popular culture can provide a useful framework for a consideration of several important issues relating to the social functions of libraries. The Popular Culture Studies Movement. It is not likely that it would have occurred to anyone to offer a library school course in popular culture if there had not already been a wide- spread and vigorous attempt within higher education to establish popular culture studies as a clearly defined and legitimate area of academic research and teaching. This movement, which has been gathering momentum for the past ten years, was not mentioned in the pro- fessional library literature until }. A. Clarke published his article in 1973.2 Although a certain legitimacy has been achieved, and scholars of considerable academic standing are contributing to the field, popular culture is still not entirely respectable in all quarters of higher education. Nor is it yet a clearly defined discipline. However, it contin- ues to have a tremendous vitality and its recent progress has been spectacular. An examination of a back run of the Journal of Popular Culture and programs This article first appeared in the Journal of Education for Librarianship, Spring 1975, vol. 15, no. 4. Winter 2000 15
1 ó Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author At the time of publication, Gordon Stevenson was Associate Professor, School of Library and Information Science, State University of New York, Albany. of the annual meetings of the Popular Culture Association will show that the study of popular culture today is a vast, sprawling movement going in many dif- ferent directions and originating in other disciplines as diverse as literature, American studies, sociology, journalism, economics, and architecture. It has estab- lished at least a modest foothold at all levels of education, from high school to postgraduate studies. The need for edu- cational innovation and change accounts at least in part for the interest generated by the study of popular culture. It deals with lively and pertinent topics that, in one way or another, are intimately relat- ed to each student's experience of the world in which he or she lives. What is most intriguing about the current popular culture studies move- ment is the approach to the materials. For the most part, the approach is non- critical, as opposed to the value-laden approach characteristic of earlier aca- demic encounters with current popular culture. Unencumbered by aesthetics of popular culture, research centers on its historical, structural, functional, and behavioral dimensions. One of several concerns of popular culture studies is the use of messages, artifacts, and rituals in the communication of culture. The messages relate to the structure of such institutions as family life and religion, to political ideologies and myths, and to personal value systems. The artifacts are as diverse as comic books, Coke bottles, and sound recordings. The rituals are as mundane as watching television or going to a movie or a shopping center. The Course at Albany. There are many ways of studying popular culture and many reasons for studying it. Obviously, not all of these are relevant to education for librarianship. The follow- ing description, drawn from one of sev- eral handouts distributed to students prior to registration, outlines the general approach to these issues at Albany: Popular Culture. The purpose of this course is to examine the social func- tions and meaning of popular culture (i.e., the meaning of the message in such diverse popular forms of commu- nication as gothic novels, comic books, TV, advertisements, and the other junk that clutters up our lives). We will look for broad fundamental principles in a few selected examples. First we will make a quick survey of the material by media: print (gothics, SF, westerns, and crime), sound recordings (C&W, blues, rock), pop magazines (such as My True Story and the like), etc. Then we will pick a few basic themes that cut across all or most media, themes such as women in popular culture, religion, and the alienated hero. We will be interested in the images, life styles, role models, val- ues, and ideologies that are presented in popular culture. We will touch only briefly on aesthetic and technical aspects of the pop arts. Students will be expected to read, watch, and listen to examples of popular culture, think about it and analyze it, and take part vigorously in class discussions. In so far as possible, we will study the bibliographical control of the material in each area, with sugges- tions for collection building, etc. However, the central point is whether Volume 4L Number 1
Popular Culture Studies and Library Education 1 7 or not libraries should assemble, organize, and disseminate popular culture materials. The course will not aim at a consensus in answering this question, but each student is expected to defend his own conclusions.3 This is a reasonably accurate description of the external framework of the course and its purpose as conceived by the instructor and students. There are, however, a hidden agenda and other unstated aims that are somewhat more subtle than is evident from this description. Assumptions. The basic assumption of the course is that popular culture is a series of communications systems that play an important role in the organiza- tion and structure of the political, cul- tural, and economic institutions that control society. An analysis based on traditional academic critical techniques labels most popular culture as "trash" and dismisses it as irrelevant. Trash it may very well be, but irrelevant it is not. "Bonanza" and "The FBI" are morality plays, the Super Bowl is a ritual cele- brating the fundamental beliefs and ideals of democracy, and popular song lyrics provide the young with images and role models from which they con- struct their fictional selves. Another assumption of the course questions widely held beliefs about the social significance of the production, distribution, and consumption of knowledge in the United States. Here we are dealing with sacrosanct assumptions that have influenced library education for more than a decade. The course explores the hypothesis that, contrary to what we have been led to believe, mod- ern, industrialized, urban societies (at least as they are presently constituted) require not more and more information of most of their individual members, but less and less information. This hypothe- sis draws in part on ideas such as those articulated by C. W. Mills in his analysis of mass society and by H. I. Schiller in his study of the relationship between private enterprise and the mass media.4 The implications of this hypothesis go far beyond the immediate issue of the functions of popular culture. It raises such questions as these: How much information does a person need to func- tion in modern society? How are needs created? What types of information are needed? What conflicts emerge from a lack of congruence between needs as conceived by the individual and as established by social custom and tradi- tion? How is information acquired? How is it generated and diffused? We have to assume that much of popular culture is the most subtle form of propaganda (in Jacques Ellul's definition of that term).5 The mass media systems to which most people are exposed provide carefully structured messages, all of which are of cultural significance and most of which are directly or indirectly related to the economic system. The pur- pose of these messages is to control behavior, and in toto they constitute a pervasive informational environment from which escape is next to impossible. It is an area full of paradoxes. For exam- ple: messages designed for one purpose (e.g., to assemble an audience to advertise a product) may have certain noneconom- ic externalities that are socially undesir- able (e.g., crime, alienation, violence); messages heretofore thought to be harm- less escape mechanisms (e.g., gothic nov- els) may in fact be symbolic affirmations of current social roles and structures. The ultimate impact of mass-pro- duced popular culture on the quality of life in the United States is not known. The idea that there is even a connection between the two is relatively new. When social indicators were first introduced, social scientists developed measure- ment tools that could conceivably give high positive ratings to a society, which Winter 2000
1 8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science at the same time could be a living night- mare. A somewhat more humanistic way of measuring the quality of life is emerging from the development of cul- tural indicators. In studying television programs as a demonstration case for the source of such indicators, George Gerbner wrote, "We know next to noth- ing about the trends in the composition of mass-produced message systems that govern men's lives and inform men's minds in urbanized societies."6 Gerbner is interested in studying the "prevailing symbolic environment." And this is the crossroads where popular culture stud- ies, mass communications research, sociology, librarianship, and other disci- plines meet in the common enterprise of trying to understand how information flows through society, what factors shape this flow, and how it interacts with individuals and institutions. Information Needs. The symbolic environment, particularly as perpetuated in the popular culture of the mass media, is a major factor - though certainly not the only factor - in shaping the structure of information needs as conceived by the individual in the social milieu. Both the terms "information" and "needs" have to be defined within the context of popular culture. The first term, information, real- ly defies definition, and we can only construct tentative working definitions appropriate for specific contexts. For the purpose of a study of popular culture, it seems useful to begin by defining infor- mation in terms of how and why people use it, rather than by objective catego- rizations based on content. Of course, sooner or later, content has to be catego- rized and techniques of content analysis must be used. Hard or factual informa- tion is not a problem. But most popular culture does not deal with hard or factu- al information (though it may appear to do so), and we have to assume that most of it has a second level of significance. It is at this second level that basic human drives and fears can be exploited, creat- ed, or manipulated. One of the most overworked clichés of librarianship is the statement that libraries exist "to serve the needs" of users. This is not the place to examine the full ramifications of this statement. However, it is clear that we have to con- sider who is defining these needs and make a distinction between the librari- an's definition of needs and the needs of individuals as evidenced in their behav- ior - that is, in their own selection and use of information sources. This is not to say that librarians cannot or should not make subjective judgments about what they think the needs of people should be. But this is another matter. I am only saying that popular culture, no matter how debased or corrupt we may think it is, does indeed fulfill some needs of those who consume it. Specific Goals. There are a number of legitimate goals that could be estab- lished for a library-oriented course in popular culture. One could, for exam- ple, think of it as an Alternate or Counter Humanities Literature course with goals comparable to those of tradi- tional humanities literature courses, but dealing with popular materials. In part, the course at Albany uses this approach. However, the important issues deal with students' attitudes toward the materials and the people who use the materials. The goals of the Albany course are as follows: 1. To force students to look objectively at their own popular culture milieu, examine how they have used popu- lar culture, and try to determine how it has affected them; 2. To understand something of the nature of public communications in relationship to democratic myths and values, and from a study of pop- ular culture draw inferences about the nature of these beliefs and values; Volume 41, Number 1
Popular Culture Studies and Library Education 1 9 3. To develop approaches to other sys- tems of popular culture, particular- ly those of minority groups, with a view to understanding what values and lifestyles they mirror; and 4. To develop criteria for determining the relationship between libraries and popular culture materials. Central to several of these goals has to be an attempt to convince students that their perception of the good and the beautiful is entirely a product of factors in their own lives. The students are themselves products of as much as twen- ty years of concentrated exposure to pop- ular culture disseminated through the mass media. For them to study this phe- nomenon objectively creates tremendous problems. Students who, for example, "like" to read science fiction usually believe that gothic novels and western pulp fiction are quite inane. Their assumption is that they themselves have made some sort of rational choice in pre- ferring the one genre to the others; they would attribute this to what B. F. Skinner has identified as the "autonomous man."7 The assumption of Skinner and of the course is that the autonomous man is a self-delusion. In teaching the course, I assume that my students, for the most part, do not know in any rational sense the very culture in which they are immersed and that has played a part in shaping their own individual images of themselves and the world in which they live. The popular culture process is a subtle play of symbols and meanings that are experienced. One does not think about popular culture, one responds to it, and in the process behavior is rein- forced and values strengthened. I assume that my students are prod- ucts of informational environments over which they have had little or no control, and that most of their education, both formal and informal, has been advertis- ing or propaganda pure and simple. I assume that what they are and what they conceive themselves to be are largely fic- tions, fabrications constructed from a vast array of message systems to which they have been exposed. Whether or not one agrees with this - and my own expe- rience in teaching lends credence to Skinner's behaviorism - it is a useful stance to take in encouraging students to consider their future roles. They need to think about where they, as unique indi- viduals, fit into an information transfer process that involves the cultural milieu of libraries, the structure of the world as experienced by a variety of potential library users, and the library as a socio- political institution. I suggest to stu- dents that they seriously consider the possibility that in the real world no one cares one way or another what they hap- pen to personally like or dislike except to the extent that their values facilitate or inhibit communication. Foundations. Popular culture mes- sage systems have to be considered within the framework of several concep- tual models. One way or another, some of the basic concepts outlined in stan- dard texts (e.g., Berlo or Lin) must be known to students.8 J. H. Shera's work provides a fine foundation with the added advantages of the author's biblio- graphical perspective and searching dis- cussions of information, culture, and libraries.9 But what is done here and how it is done obviously depend on the nature of a school's required courses and what is taught in other communications courses to which students have access. At the library school in Albany, for the past several years, the same instructor has taught both the popular culture course and a course called The Communications Process, thus permit- ting a nice alignment of two approaches to public communications systems. Ideally, the course in the communica- tions process would be a prerequisite for the popular culture course, but this is Winter 2000
20 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science not possible. And since both courses are electives, it is necessary to examine some fundamental principles in both courses, while at the same time keeping duplication to a minimum. The general communications course is described in the school's catalog as follows: Lib. 613. The Communications Process. Study of several models and points of view of communications; agencies engaged in the production and distri- bution of knowledge; comparison of media; analysis of content; characteris- tics of audiences; effects of exposure. Emphasis on the role of reading and libraries in the communication com- plex, and the problems of intellectual freedom.10 This is essentially correct except that the emphasis is not on reading. This course emphasizes theory and deals in some detail with mass communications with a more-or-less traditional approach. As William Stephenson has pointed out, "From its beginning, in 1924, mass com- munication theory has concerned itself primarily with how the mass media influence attitudes, beliefs, and actions of people."11 But a clear distinction was made between types of messages stud- ied. As E. Katz and D. Foulkes wrote, "It is a most intriguing fact in the intellectu- al history of social research that the choice was made to study media as agents of persuasion rather than enter- tainment," thus eliminating most popu- lar culture from mass communications research.12 This dichotomy, apparently deeply ingrained in academic tradition, is obviously false, or misleading at best, and would not stand up under close scrutiny. In any case, a course in popular culture communications systems could deal with the material identified by Katz and Foulkes as "entertainment" and still be firmly based on the general principles that currently are used in mass commu- nications studies. Practical Matters of Teaching. As A. A. Berger has pointed out, "There are two basic methods of studying popular culture: you can see what others have written about it or you can analyze it yourself."13 And R. S. Denisoff wrote that, "popular culture can and should be approached in many different ways. There is no one technique which is notably superior to another."14 Yet, the special aims of library education and the general characteristics of students cur- rently attracted to library schools can obviously provide a general framework for establishing appropriate approaches to the material. At a fairly superficial and practical level, we can identify certain traditional functions of libraries that require types of knowledge and skills related to the work of collecting, organizing, and dis- seminating knowledge: familiarity with basic reference sources, experience with current and retrospective bibliographi- cal tools, techniques of collection build- ing, problems of organization, and knowledge of user characteristics. I have to assume that students have already acquired or soon will acquire skills and knowledge in other courses that will provide approaches to these problems as they relate to popular culture. On the other hand, I have discov- ered that the students' goals in taking the course are sometimes different from my goals in teaching the course. Their goals are practical and pragmatic. Some attention to the practical dimensions of popular culture helps to counterbalance what they take to be an overemphasis on its theoretical dimensions. Without wanting to suggest that I have found solutions to the more diffi- cult problems of teaching the course or that procedures that work for me will work for other instructors, I will briefly comment on my own approach and some of the problems that I have had in trying to achieve my goals. Volume 41, Number 1
Popular Culture Studies and Library Education 21 I have used as a textbook Russell Nye's The Unembarrassed Muse, and required that students read about two- thirds of it, omitting sections on young adult literature and types of popular cul- ture that are clearly beyond the purview of the library.15 It is not always possible to coordinate the Nye readings with my lectures. In any case, Nye's historical and descriptive approach is intended as background reading, and we seldom dis- cuss it in class. After introductory lec- tures devoted to defining the field and the purpose of the course, I try to demonstrate how values and beliefs are manifested in popular culture. Then, in so far as possible, each example of pop- ular culture that we subsequently exam- ine is considered from the point of view of values. Whatever unity the course has emerges from the continual reference to value systems. Early in the course, I have asked students to read one gothic novel, ana- lyzing it from the point of view of Joanna Russ' study of gothics, and two novels each from the genres of the west- ern, science fiction, and crime, in each case using analytical reference points drawn from the literature about popular fiction.16 I have had a unit on popular magazines and required that students make an analytical study of one of the popular supermarket or drugstore type of magazines. This involves some pre- liminary discussion of advertising, and for this there is a considerable amount of good background material. (I have used required readings by Berger and B. H. Nelson.17) In the earlier versions of the course, I tried to avoid placing any special emphasis on one area in which I have had a long-standing interest: recorded music. However, I am now convinced that, given the proper theoretical under- pinnings and a solid conceptual frame- work, the fundamental aims of the course can be achieved with any one of a variety of different approaches in regard to the choice of material: (1) a heavy emphasis on a limited number of media; (2) a concentration on the mes- sages disseminated by one medium (e.g., recorded sound or print); and (3) no emphasis on any specific medium, but with a strictly thematic approach. By "thematic approach," I mean the identi- fication of some rather specific topics or perspectives followed by the analysis of a variety of popular culture artifacts from different media. A few such themes are the role of women (e.g., in the gothic novel, in country and western music, in television soap operas, in advertising, etc.); the concept of authority; crime, criminals, and victims; the nature of work in society; romantic love; and the nature of success. The thematic approach has much to recommend it, and I have never consid- ered the approach by media to be any- thing more than an expedient. However, I am reluctant to abandon a media per- spective entirely because there is so much that students need to know about media processes. They need to consider the complex relationship between media and content and the extent to which each specific medium imposes its own laws on the nature of content and the extent to which each has its own sys- tem of interacting with the human mind. Another advantage of the media approach is the opportunity to examine the specific economic backgrounds of the different media - that is, the peculiar chemistry of economic processes that in the end accounts for what messages are actually produced and disseminated. This, it seems to me, is extremely impor- tant, for the competitive marketing sys- tem that influences production may have cultural spin-offs that are com- pletely antithetical to the cultural aims of a specific library. By and large, the extent to which the course is successful does not seem to Winter 2000
22 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science depend on some of the details of content or approach. At least this seems to be the case from the point of view of the stu- dents. Since my own goals are less tan- gible and more difficult to measure than those of the students, I generally finish the course with a certain frustration. I have experienced some difficulty in presenting to my students some of the basic sociological concepts. I find, for example, P. L. Berger's work on social knowledge and H. D. Duncan's work on symbolic transformation to be quite rel- evant to the course.18 Yet if such materi- al is to have any meaningful impact on students, it seems it must be related to their experiences. In other words, what does it have to do with Bob Dylan or Carly Simon? Since the bulk of my stu- dents seem to lack a broad, ongoing interest in sociology and are not particu- larly enthusiastic about abstract think- ing, it seems best to introduce a limited number of these concepts in relation to specific examples of popular culture. What can be done here, and how it is done, are entirely dependent on the background, resources, and interests of the instructor. At various times in teaching the course, I have drawn very selectively on concepts and theories of democratic myths and ideologies, behavior in public places, authoritarian- ism, propaganda, the achievement motive, and the sociology of the absurd.19 I have found much relevant material on popular images in the works of D. J. Boorstin and K. E. Boulding; and of course in the work of M. McLuhan, particularly The Mechanical Bride, and E. Carpenter, whose book, They Became What They Beheld, fascinates students.20 Some problems emerge when one begins to take students outside of their own symbolic environment. I am con- vinced, however, that this experience should be part of their education. Students cannot fully appreciate the extent to which their responses to their own popular culture are automatic and mindless until they have made an attempt to unravel the significance of symbol systems from outside of their own environments. For this reason, I have generally tried to make at least two excursions outside of the current, main- stream cultural milieu. These have been studies of the "race records" (e.g., com- mercial sound recordings for black minorities) of the 1920s and 1930s, and early commercial country and western music. It is in examining these materials (which, though historical, are clearly related to current popular cultures) that the students are confronted with mes- sage systems that are emotionally alien to them. Real communication breaks down immediately. Messages that are deadly serious are thought by the stu- dents to be funny. When the material is humorous, the students laugh at the wrong things for the wrong reasons. In dealing with these materials, one point has consistently emerged with shatter- ing force: the students are prejudiced toward systems of communication of cultural minorities. Their initial reac- tion, for example, to blues and gospel music of Willie Johnson has been fright- ening in the extreme, exposing deep, pervasive ignorances of monumental proportions.21 I take it that this is not necessarily insensitivity to human emo- tions, but rather unfamiliarity with the idiom, style, and symbols that surround the messages. It is comparable to expos- ing students to Chinese opera, but with one important difference. Chinese opera is so alien to the students that about all that is transmitted is a disorganized mass of noise. In the case of popular cul- ture of minorities, there are some com- mon symbols, but the whole message is distorted grotesquely as it is filtered through the students' lifetime condition- ing by mass-media culture. The inescap- able conclusion is that the students' reactions to the artifacts and messages of Volume 41, Number 1
Popular Culture Studies and Library Education 23 their own cultural milieu are purely spontaneous and irrational. An examination of these historical documents also provides excellent material for the comparative analysis of value systems and can be used to demonstrate the impact of technology on the evolution of popular culture dur- ing the past four decades. Content Analysis. Some form of content analysis obviously is indispen- sable in any library school curriculum (how could one classify or subject cata- log without analyzing the content of documents?), but formal content analy- sis techniques as used in communica- tions research are another matter. By and large, it has been my experience that when first introduced to content analysis, most students are quite intrigued. But this fascination begins to dissipate rather rapidly when one begins to deal with quantitative research. The study of popular culture, however, is hardly possible without at least some knowledge of content analy- sis. My own aims are to make students reasonably intelligent consumers of content analysis research and introduce them to its broad outlines and a few spe- cific techniques. The construction of categories, for example, seems to be one of the most immediately useful tech- niques, and there are several good intro- ductions to these techniques (T. F. Carney and 0. R. Holsti, for example).22 Throughout the course, whenever possi- ble, I include required readings from related content analysis research. Nonquantitative content analysis studies, however, prove to be more attractive to students, and these are no less valuable because they are not quan- titative. Such works as L. Chenoweth's examination of Jimi Hendrix and the Jefferson Airplane and W. Mellers' study of the Beatles are good examples of indispensable nonquantitative con- tent analysis.23 The Good and the Beautiful. A prob- lem that has to be dealt with is the aca- demic criteria for evaluating literature. Most students bring to popular literature a whole set of a priori assumptions about what is "good" and what is "bad." In their discussions of popular literature, they like to demonstrate their critical facilities and high standards by making such statements as "the plot is weak," "the book is poorly written," "the char- acters are one-dimensional stereotypes." Such comments are completely irrele- vant to the course, for they say nothing useful about why millions of people read popular fiction, the systems of values that it projects, or its symbolic signifi- cance. Thus, developing an approach to popular literature involves training stu- dents to avoid falling into the trap of responding with meaningless undergrad- uate clichés, which, in any case, are a poor substitute for thinking. But in the end, the issue of popular versus elite cul- ture (essentially the "good" versus the "bad") cannot be avoided. A discussion of salient points in this long controversy provides effective issues around which to summarize the course and consider the role of the librarian and the library in relationship to current mass culture. Toward the end of the course, after having held aesthetic judgments in abeyance while trying to understand the processes and functions of popular cul- ture, it is good to return to the literature that variously attacks and defends popu- lar culture. Here one can discuss basic issues while students bring into play their own concepts of the good and the beautiful. As background reading, I have used material by W. H. Gass, J. Ortega y Gasset, E. van den Haag, J. G. Cawelti, and R. Hoggart.24 Other Approaches. In studying pop- ular culture, nothing is sacred, least of all a commitment to any single syllabus. The field is vast, the equipment any sin- gle instructor brings to such a course is Winter 2000
24 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science usually a unique one with special possi- bilities and limitations, and the students themselves are variously equipped with intellectual tools and attitudes neces- sary to study popular culture. There is probably no other area of higher educa- tion that lends itself to such a variety of approaches and methods. An indispensable sourcebook for the instructor planning a popular cul- ture course for the first time is Popular Culture and Curricula, by R. B. Browne and R. J. Ambrosetti.25 The quarterly publication of the Popular Culture Association, Popular Culture Methods, will keep one informed of recent devel- opments in teaching various aspects of popular culture. A course for librarians devoted exclusively to popular litera- ture could be built around one of the anthologies of primary source material. The Popular Culture Explosion by Browne and D. Madden is excellent.26 The more recent anthology by D. McQuade and R. Atwan could also serve as a text, but would involve com- mitting the entire course to the printed word.27 Both of these texts have fine instructor's manuals that I have found most useful in framing my own ques- tions about popular culture. Finally, A. Gowans' book, The Unchanging Arts, deals with contemporary pictorial arts within the framework of the author's remarkably persuasive arguments about the role of the popular arts in contem- porary society.28 The work would serve as a fine text, but in any case should be read by anyone teaching a course in popular culture. Conclusion. Education for librarian- ship has managed to survive for a long time without the use of studies in popu- lar culture, and doubtless this will remain the case in many library schools for a long time to come. Many of the goals of the course at Albany could probably be achieved in other courses and by other means. On the other hand, teaching some of the fundamentals of communications processes within the context of popular culture and using it as a vehicle to get at the more subtle issues of librarianship can be a very rewarding experience both for the instructor and the students. Within the context of popular culture communica- tions, one can discuss the profoundest of sociological concepts and raise basic theoretical and practical issues about the cultural functions of libraries. One can do this while working with subject matter that fascinates students and in an atmosphere that encourages both intro- spection and empathy. References 1. State University of New York at Albany, School of Library and Information Science, Bulletin: 1975 (in press). 2. J. A. Clarke, "Popular Culture in Libraries," College & Research Libraries 34 (May 1973): 215-18. 3. State University of New York at Albany, School of Library and Information Science, Special Courses (Mimeographed, Spring 1974). 4. C. W. Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1956), 298-324; H. I. Schiller, The Mind Managers (Boston: Beacon Pr., 1975). 5. J. Ellul, Propaganda (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965). 6. G. Gerbner, "Cultural Indicators: The Case of Violence in Television Drama," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 388 (March 1970): 70. 7. B. F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and Dignity (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971). 8. D. K. Berlo, The Process of Communication (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1960); N. Lin, The Study of Human Communication (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973). 9. J. H. Shera, The Foundations of Education for Librarianship (New York: Becker and Hayes, 1972). Volume 41, Number 1
Popular Culture Studies and Library Education 25 10. State University of New York at Albany, School of Library and Information Science, Bulletin: 1972-74, 40. 11. W. Stephenson, The Play Theory of Mass Communication (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1967), 1. 12. E. Katz and D. Foulkes, "On the Use of the Mass Media as 'Escape': Clarification of a Concept," Public Opinion Quarterly 26 (Fall 1962): 379. 13. A. A. Berger, Pop Culture (Dayton, Ohio: Pflaum/Standard, 1973), 10. 14. R. S. Denisoff, "A Short Note on Studying Popular Culture," in Popular Culture and Curricula, rev ed., R. B. Browne and R. J. Ambrosetti, eds. (Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green Univ. Popular Pr., 1972), 101. 15. R. Nye, The Unembarrassed Muse (New York: Dial Pr., 1970). 16. J. Russ, "Somebody's Trying to Kill Me and I Think It's My Husband: The Modern Gothic," Journal of Popular Culture 6 (Spring 1973): 666-91. 17. A. A. Berger, "Critically Comprehending the Commercial," Popular Culture Methods 1 (Spring 1973): 16-19; B. H. Nelson, "Seven Principles of Image Formation," Journal of Marketing 26 (January 1962): 67-71. 18. P. L. Berger and T. Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1966); H. D. Duncan, Communication and Social Order (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1968). 19. R. J. Monsen, Modern American Capitalism: Ideologies and Issues (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1963); E. Goffman, Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order (New York: Basic Books, 1971); T. W. Adorno et al. The Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper & Row, 1950); Ellul, Propaganda; D. C. McClelland, The Achieving Society (New York: The Free Pr., 1967); S. M. Lyman and M. B. Scott, A Sociology of the Absurd (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970). 20. D. J. Boorstin, The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America (New York: Harper & Row, 1964); K. E. Boulding, The Image (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Univ. of Michigan Pr., 1956); M. McLuhan, The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man (Boston: Beacon Pr., 1967); E. Carpenter, They Became What They Beheld (New York: Outerbridge & Dienstfrey/Ballantine Books, 1970). 21. W. Johnson, Blind Willie Johnson: 1927-1930. Edited with an introduction by Samuel Charters. Phonodisc. RBF-10, 1965. 22. T. F. Carney, Content Analysis (London: B. T. Batsford, 1972); O. R. Holsti, Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Weslev. 1969Ì. 23. L. Chenoweth, "The Rhetoric of Hope and Despair: A Study of the Jimi Hendrix Experience and the Jefferson Airplane," American Quarterly 23 (Spring 1971): 25-45; W. Mellers, Twilight of the Gods: The Music of the Beatles (New York: Viking Press, 1974). 24. W. H. Gass, "Even if, by all the Oxen m the World (a Polemic)," in Frontiers of American Culture, R. B. Browne et al., eds. (West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue Univ. Studies, 1968), 194-199; J. Ortega y Gasset, The Revolt of the Masses (New York: W. W. Norton, 1957); E. van den Haag, "A Dissent from the Consensual Society," in A Mass Culture Revisited, eds. Bernard Rosenberg and David Manning White (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1971), 85-92; J. G. Cawelti, "Beatles, Batman, and the New Aesthetic," Midway 9 (Autumn 1968): 49-70; R. Hoggart, The Uses of Literacy (Boston: Beacon Pr., 1961). 25. R. B. Browne and R. J. Ambrosetti, eds., Popular Culture and Curricula, rev. ed. (Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green Univ. Popular Pr., 1972). 26. R. B. Browne and D. Madden, The Popular Culture Explosion (Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown, 1972). 27. D. McQuade and R. Atwan, Popular Culture in America: The Interaction of Style and Audience (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1974). 28. A. Gowans, The Unchanging Arts: New Forms for the Traditional Functions of Art in Society (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1971). Winter 2000