T H E LI BRARY QUARTERLY Volume XXXIII OCTOBER 1963 Number 4 COMMUNITY LENDING LIBRARIES IN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY IRELAND AND WALES PAUL KAUFMAN N O SIGNIFICANT cultural move- ment of the past two centuries has inspired so little searching investigation as the rise and early spread of "popular" lending libraries in the English-speaking world. For Eng- land itself two studies,' one of the com- mercial circulating establishment, the other of the non-profit subscription type, made valuable surveys of a vast unmapped area of important activity. For Scotland a comprehensive study is now under way. For Ireland and Wales intensive search has produced a frus- trating scantiness of evidence. But meager though it is, the evidence should be, and here is presented.2 For Ireland, first, two recent sur- veys which (we may hope) presage long-delayed research into Irish library history: one is a useful and reliable article by Thomas P. O'Neill and Des- mond J. Clarke, "Libraries in Ireland: An Historical Outline";3 the second is the thirty-page brochure by Maura Tallon, "Church of Ireland Diocesan ' Hilda M. Hamlyn, "Eighteenth-century Circu- lating Libraries in England," The Library, 5th ser., I (1946) 197-222; and Frank Beckwith, "The Eighteenth-century Proprietary Library in Eng- land," Journal of Documentation, III (1947), 81- 98. These descriptive terms, "circulating" and "pro- prietary," have long needed a thorough scrutiny. As J. H. Shera in Foundations of the Public Library (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949) has pointedly asserted, "it is time that there be definitions which are generally accepted" (p. 59n.); and one might add "on both sides of the Atlantic-if possible." Obviously both types of organizations are "circulating" and are supported by subscription. But many subscription institutions are not "proprietary," since the members do not own the property. The name "social library" de- noting the non-profit organization in the Colonial and later American periods, however apt and de- sirable, has not been adopted in the present study because it is strange to English ears. The expression proposed in the title "community lending libraries" does per se tacitly include ecclesiastical founda- tions, but it is not thought necessary to prefix another adjective such as "secular." No apology is offered for return to "circulating" in these pages since the name was so universally an integral ele- ment in the name of establishments and was so universally understood as meaning "commercial." Almost as universally the non-profit type was known as a "Society." 2 This study has been supported in part by a grant from the American Philosophical Society. For indispensable aid I am indebted to the Na- tional Library of Ireland, the Royal Irish Academy, Drs. E. A. Crawford and R. B. McDowell of Trinity College, Dublin, Dr. Thomas Wall of the Irish Folklore Commission, who sent his private collection of book labels for inspection, and to Miss Maura Tallon, who has constantly placed her ex- tensive learning at my disposal and provided essen- tial transcripts of material. 8 The Library Association Record, LVIII (1956), 48-57. Thomas P. O'Neill, F.L.A.T., is Assistant Keeper of Printed Books, National Library of Ire- land; Desmond J. Clarke, F.L.A.T., is Librarian, Royal Dublin Society. 299
300 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Libraries,"4 a pioneer compendium fill- ing a large gap. Miss Tallon's field of ecclesiastical institutions is beyond the scope of this article, but the former sur- vey provides pertinent data and orienta- tion. Found in it is the promising ob- servation: "The eighteenth century, which witnessed such a tremendous re- vival in many aspects of Irish life con- sequent upon the Anglo-Irish ruling as- cendancy assuming a new interest in the country of their birth, also witnessed the foundation, growth, and develop- ment of the learned societies whose li- braries were to play an important part in the development of the public library movement in Ireland."5 O'Neill and Clarke then present an informative condensed description of the libraries of learned societies, but they do not include community lending institutions within the purview of the "tremendous revival." Although the proprietary societies at Dublin and Bel- fast are named with a few facts about each and the one at Cork is mentioned along with the nineteenth century es- tablishments at Limerick and Kilkenny, the commercial lending establishments are not recognized at all. IRISH CIRCULATING LIBRARIES Admittedly, the circulating libraries have concealed themselves with uncan- ny skill from the eyes of prying pos- terity! To only two indeed is there un- deniable testimony: A. Stuart "at the circulating library in Dane Street," 1774-89; 6 and at Cork, D. Jacotin's catalog of an English, French, and Ital- ian circulating library dated from St. Patrick Street in 1803.7 An additional reference mentions the egregious "Mrs. Lord" of Dublin, most divertingly de- scribed by Montague Summers, who al- leges that when an irate father made violent protest against the lending of novels too shocking for innocent young girls, Mrs. Lord explained that she care- fully underlined the passages of doubt- ful delicacy in Lewis's Monk to warn the reader what to skip 18 Of these three, then, only one con- temporary record of any substance has survived, the three-page Jacotin cata- log, with a total of fifty-one titles and less than a hundred volumes. The titles of the first of two pages of the stock, transcribed verbatim, are: "Helen of Glenross, a Novel: Genlis's Novels; Infernal Quixote, by Charles Lucas; The Knight and Mason, a Nov- el; The Village Romance, by Jane El- son; Memoirs of the late Mrs. Robin- son; Mysterious Friendship, a Tale; 'Dublin: Library Association of Ireland, 1959. ' O'Neill and Clarke, op. cit., p. 49. ' The only authority is a quoted phrase in H. R. Plomer, A Dictionary of the Printers and Book- sellers . . . from 1726-1775 (Oxford: Oxford Uni- versity Press, 1932). Plomer, regrettably, as too often, gives no source, but it is probably a Dublin directory. 7 A Catalogue, of the English, French and Italian Circulating-Library, St. Patrick's-Street, Cork; Where Books are Lent, by D. Jacotin, Book-Seller, Stationer, &c. At One Guinea per Year, Thirteen Shillings a Half Year, Eight Shillings and Eight- pence, a Quarter, Three Shillings & Nine-Pence Half-Penny a Month, One British Shilling per Week. Cork, Printed, 1803. The verso of the title page specifies the "Conditions" of the lending service in unusually brief terms, but with a most unusual trial period, as it were, for the first month of the subscription, which allowed only three days for a loan in town and five days in the country per volume. As this is the only catalog of a commercial rental establishment currently known to survive from the eighteenth (or very early nineteenth) century, it has an obviously unique value. Hence no apology seems necessary for the amount of space accorded it in our survey. 8Montague Summers, The Gothic Quest (Lon- don, 1938), p. 219. Although the waywardly erudite Rev. Mr. Summers supplies 239 footnotes to the chapter "Matthew Gregory Lewis" he overlooks any authority for this engaging reference.
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 301 George Hay Drummond's Verses; Which is the Man, a Novel, by Mrs. Meeke; Broad Grins, by George Col- man the Younger; Welsh Legends, a Collection of Tales; The Confession; Beauties of British Poetry; Forbidden Appartments, by William Linley; The Castle of Villeroy, by Frances Mary Mills; Netterville, a Novel; The Phil- anthrope; Dialogues of the Gods, from Wieland; The Spirit of the Public Jour- nals; The Noble Wanderers, a Novel; and Lottery of Life, by Mr. Littleton." The second page, with its badly frayed edge, shows an even greater prominence of novels, such as "Em- brace on the Grave from the German," but also "Travels through England" and "[Travels through?] France" by Miss Williams, and "from the German of La Fontain." Prices given for each work are high, only two being as low as 6s. 6d. and several four-volume titles cost- ing ?1 8s. In general the offerings are duplicated in the corresponding catalogs in England, but only one of these latter, among about forty known to me, fea- tures only fiction, and none of them shows so brief a list. The prominent heading "English Editions" at the top of page one may indicate another cata- log with Irish imprints. We wonder, moreover, why French and Italian works have so modest a place in an "English, French and Italian" library. Perhaps "Mrs. Jacotin" (as she is called in an announcement under "Con- ditions") was developing a clientele with a reading taste for French and Italian, as she advertised an "Evening Academy" for instruction in the two languages. Were the Jacotins refugees from the upheaval of France in the 1790's? And did they bring some model of a rental library with them? The an- swer to these questions must await the discovery of some document to tell us more about rental shops in Cork. Only these three circulating libraries are in any way identified. Apparently they did not advertise, for a complete index under the auspices of the Nation- al Library of Ireland of the Dublin newspapers from 1760 to 1780 yields no information about circulating libraries. Yet, it is hard to believe that of the 152 booksellers named by Dix9 in Ireland between 1 72 6 and 1 7 7 5 some, perhaps a goodly number, did not offer a lending service. Surely the "tremendous reviv- al" must have produced centers for purveying at nominal cost new worlds of print for questing minds, albeit they thirsted only for cheap romance. IRISH SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARIES Evidence is abundant, however, about the non-profit subscription institutions, although only three of these can be identified-at Cork, Dublin, and Bel- fast. There is no catalog or other early publication for Cork, but the descrip- tion of a copy of The Catalogue of the Cork Library Society . . ., 1801 is a reliable secondary source.'0 This ac- count lists the eight life members and the 143 ordinary members, together with officers, and committee. Founded in 1792, by 1801 the Society had over 600 works as classified in the following summary: I.e., in the volume cited in n. 6 above. 10 All data are derived from James Coleman, "The Cork Library in 1801 and 1820," Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaeological Society, XI, 2d ser. (1905), 82-93. Coleman, who was honorary secretary of the society, cites as his source a copy of the Society's Catalogue of 1801, lent to him by Robert Day, the president of the Historical and Archaeological Society; and he states that further sources have disappeared. The copy of the Cata- logue in question does not appear in the records of other Irish libraries.
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY History, Antiques and Geography ... 146 Biography ....................... 38 Politicks & Political Economy . ........21 Morality ........................ 13 Law ............................ 4 Divinity & Sermons ............... 7 Sciences, Metaphysics, Arts ......... 62 Medicine, Surgery, Anatomy & Chemistry ..................... 83 Natural History, Minerology, Botany & Agriculture ............ 26 Voyages & Travels ................ 84 Belles Lettres, Poetry, Criticism and Miscellany ........ 108 Novels and Romances ............. 25 Dictionaries and Grammars ......... 10 Total ..................... 62 7 This was an interesting array of books, but no periodicals or newspapers were as yet provided. By 1820 when the second catalog was issued, the stock had increased to 2,013 titles, and among the members were included a few ladies and "Many foreigners." The dues were a half guinea entrance fee and a guinea a year. Names of persons proposed for member- ship were to be posted, except that those of ladies-with considerate gal- lantry-were confined to a special book. The hours of opening were 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (4 P.M., November 1 to February 1) Monday through Saturday. Other rules were unusually severe: for ex- ample, 10d. per day fine for overdue books and actual expulsion for lending a book to a non-member. A more ur- bane provision allowed a visitor to Cork to read in the library for one week." THE DUBLIN LIBRARY The second of these institutions, the Dublin Library Society, can be de- scribed in more satisfactory detail, be- ginning with its interesting origins in the gatherings of a group at John Ar- cher's book shop at 80 Dane Street to read newspapers and transactions of philosophical societies, both British and foreign.12 Continuing for a year or more in this informal fashion, they finally de- cided to effect a more stable organiza- tion and to that end they held a historic meeting chaired by Richard Kirwan, the chemist, on May 21, 1791. The ob- jects of the new society were defined as (1) the acquisition of expensive books beyond the reach of the private in- dividual and (2) the purchase of any works with "just pretensions to merit in any branch of literature or science." The annual subscription was set at one guinea (with a life membership at ten guineas), and the institution was to be managed by a committee of twenty- one, chosen annually from the member- "Other regulations, apparently printed only in the 1820 Catalogue, include a statement of the pro- prietary nature of the society, the ownership of the property being vested in the officers elected at the annual meeting. (Ladies to vote by proxy!) The restriction to the loan of only one book at a time to a member is unusual but may result, as at Jacotin's, from the small stock, providing of course that a much larger membership had developed since 1801. The ban on circulation of reference works and on new books (for the first month) indicates the use of the library as a reading room. 12 The main source is Catalogue of Books Belong- ing to the Dublin Library Society, to Which Are Prefixed the Laws of the Institution, and a List of the Subscribers, 1792, 32 pp. The copy in the National Library of Ireland has been used in this study. A helpful survey is Alexander MacWilliam, "The Dublin Library Society, 1791-1882," Biblio- graphical Society of Ireland, II (1925), 121-31. MacWilliam quotes Sir John T. Gilbert, History of the City of Dublin (Dublin, 1903), as citing as one of his authorities the manuscript Records of the Dublin Library Society, but these, Mac- William states, he was unable to trace. He uses also Secret History of the Dublin Library Society, 1808, a rather tedious recital of the sordid and highly complex conflict between warring factions. Further effort to summarize it seems to lie outside the scope of the present study. The essentials can be found in MacWilliam's article. It is highly significant that one of the society's laws prohibited either religious or political discus- sion within its precincts!
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 303 ship as a whole. In June two rooms on the first floor (i.e., above the ground level) at the house of James Vallance, Dub- lin's leading auctioneer of books, were furnished as the society's first home. In the next year, 1792, the first catalog was published listing no less than 319 mem- bers. The "Advertisement" noted that such an institution had "hitherto [been] wholly wanting in this metropolis" and interpreted its objects as "the forma- tion of a repository of valuable and use- ful books to which subscribers may have access." The description is partic- ularly significant because of the re- striction to reference only, a limitation unique among libraries of this kind anywhere in the British Isles. Only in 1817 was a lending division established with an additional fee of another guinea a year. In the light of the original re- striction the hours of opening were un- usually liberal, 10:00 A.M.-4:00 P.M. and 7: 00-10: 00 P.M.-thus raising an interesting question respecting the li- brary's lighting. The first catalog lists scarcely more books than members, but the serial numbering of the 311 titles omits a large number of the donations listed against the names of donors. This al- phabetical list (attractively printed) may be termed "austere": it included no fiction and almost no belles lettres except a few volumes of Irish verse. (The most frivolous is Dodsley's Tri- fles.) The stock is the core of similar eighteenth-century English collections, with concentration in history: Camden, Clarendon, Gibbon, Rapin, Hume, Smollett; the collection held much less than the usual travel, being limited to Raynall, Bruce, Cook, Volney, Yeate, Townshend, Vaillant, Locke, Newton, Boyle, Priestley, Adam Smith; and much less than the usual "divinity," little except Lardner and Warburton. The classics are modest in range: Cic- ero, Horace, Terence, Vergil, Plu- tarch, and Plato, but the "Transac- tions" are remarkably complete includ- ing, besides those of the Royal Society and the American Philosophical Society, those of the Linnaean and Asiatic So- cieties. It is hard to explain the conspicuous omission of poetry, drama, and stand- ard fiction. It may be conjectured, as in the case of roughly comparable pat- terns in England, that commercial shops met the needs in these areas. These modest beginnings of the Dub- lin Society were speedily expanded: in 1795 ?600 was spent on acquisitions and five times that amount ten years later. By 1810 the titles numbered 2,400; and-even more impressive- the membership had soared to 1,200, a total unrivaled anywhere for that date. Until after the middle of the nineteenth century the society flourished, then ap- parently declined until it had to be liquidated in 1884. THE BELFAST LIBRARY The most hardy growth displayed among this noteworthy group of librar- ies, was that of the Belfast Reading So- ciety, later named the Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, and commonly known as the Linen Hall Library. This organization kept min- utes which reward the groping chroni- cler with the most complete continuous record of any such library.13 On May 13, 1788, forty-five original members 13 This record is quoted or summarized in John Anderson, History of the Belfast Library and So- ciety for Promoting Knowledge (Belfast, 1888), source for all data here given. Catalogs were issued in 1793 and 1794, but the first one known to survive is that of 1808. Citing the titles drawn from the minutes before 1800 serves the purpose here.
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY signed the first rules, which announced that "the great & first object of t,e So- ciety is to form a Library which should remain for ever the sole and undivided property of the whole Society." Later the aims were declared to embrace "the collection of an extensive Library, Philosophical Apparatus, and such productions of Nature and Art as tend to improve the mind and excite a spirit of general enquiry." Among the fifteen rules were those which established the subscription at "one shilling brittish" monthly, exclud- ed a candidate for membership by "six black beans," and provided for manage- ment by a committee of five. A few years later an entrance fee of two guin- eas was stipulated, thus also creating in- dividual property rights in the society. Ladies were admitted on terms of equality with the male members. Regarding the development of its collections, there was from the outset to be no nonsense: the purchase of "any common Novel or farce or other book of trivial amusement" was strictly banned! With that problem settled, the record of the committee's selections as pre- served from meeting to meeting in the minutes is of unusual interest. The first surviving entry of November 5, 1791, notes that "The Secretary shall pur- chase Robertson's History of Scotland, Kame's Essays and Sketches of the History of Man, the most approved History of Ireland, and inform himself, previous to the next meeting of the price of Buffon's Natural History, with col- oured and uncoloured plates." Evident- ly the Secretary did "inform himself," for at the next meeting on January 2, 1792, he was instructed to procure the set of Buffon (whether with the colored or uncolored plates is not specified), "Robertson's Disquisitions Concerning India, Encyclopedia Britannica, Kello Sermons, Analytical Reviews, Anachar- sis' Travels, Travels through Greece, and Mitford's History of Greece." One of the members, Robert Cary, came for- ward with the gift of Curry's History of Ireland. In the following seven meetings to October, 1792, these significant, typical- ly eighteenth-century selections were ordered: Gillies' History of Greece; Transactions of the Royal Society of London; Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy; the transactions of the Bath and Manchester societies, of the Edinburgh Philosophical Society, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; Philo- sophical Transactions of the Society at Philadelphia; Dodsley's Annual Regis- ter (beginning with 1788); Lavater's Aphorisms; Dr. Burney's History of Music; Johnson's Lives of the Poets; "Pope's Works, the best edition"; Hume's and Smollett's History of Eng- land; Collection of Etruscan, Greek and Roman Antiquities; Monasticon Hiber- nicum; Priestley's History of Electric- ity; Asiatic Researches; Boswell's Life of Johnson; Cook's Voyages and Life; Evelyn's Sylva; Monro's Treatise on Fishes; Observations on the Volcanoes of the Two Sicilies; and an atlas. In addition to these purchases (among many others) a total of forty- three titles, some like the Universal His- tory in twenty volumes being multi- volume works, were presented by mem- bers. Also, by way of commutation of entrance fee, a certain number of works were occasionally offered.14 14 The fourteen volumes "offered by Mr. Beard in lieu of Admission money" would seem to be generous indeed, especially since "Mr. Samuel Robinson offered two octavo volumes (a portion of a set of Curtis's Botanical Magazine" (p. 23). Mr. Beard's list as given in the minutes includes a wide range of standard works.
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 305 During this early formative period, after much exploration, the society ac- cepted in 1801 a most welcome offer of a room over the central hall of the Linen Hall, where it remains in larger quarters to this day. It was still a small Society, with only eighty-nine members in 1789, but many of these were among Belfast's most eminent citizens-as fully set forth in this invaluable history.'5 SUMMARY OF IRISH DEVELOPMENTS Thus the sum total of both types of community libraries for the whole cen- tury is disconcertingly small. For the commercial type, as we have seen, the known data are well-nigh negligible. For the subscription societies it is not improbable that the entire story is re- corded in the three institutions just de- scribed, for it seems unlikely that in a country of the size and social patterns of Ireland others would have developed and disappeared without trace. But not to be forgotten are subscription libraries at Limerick and Kilkenny in the nine- teenth century, as well as one in Lon- donderry founded in 1809.16 Why more of them did not develop earlier is one of the unsolved problems which serve to emphasize the too often neglected fact that library history perforce is a fascinating image of the complete so- cial history of a particular community or nation.'7 The possible implication of the late development of the societies needs fur- ther exploration. In England many of the non-profit libraries were established in the last two decades of the century. In London the first proprietary institu- tion was founded in 1785.18 Here, as in numerous provincial centers, adequate circulating libraries supplied the needs of most readers. Hence, in the light of so relatively late appearance of the Irish subscription societies, the possi- bility exists that commercial rental li- braries in major (or even smaller) Irish cities, however lost to sight, supplied- along with an occasional purchase-the needs of Irish readers. The abundant evidence of the multiplication of these after 180019 supports the assumption I` These are named with identification on p. 33, and the complete list of members in 1798 is given on pp. 34-35. The range of pertinent information provided is most useful, and the text is supple- mented with a number of maps of Belfast at vari- ous periods and with illustrations. Mr. J. W. Vitty, Librarian, presented a copy to the University of Washington Library. One significant sidelight worth noting is the reso- lutions passed by the society in 1792 and 1794 in favor of Catholic Emancipation and expressing sympathy with the struggles for freedom and also in favor of a "Free School." The full texts of the resolutions (pp. 91-93) are notable in their digni- fied earnestness. When this volume was published in 1888 the list of members (given complete with names) was: Proprietors, 64; Members, 199; Guinea Subscribers, 555; and Half-Guinea Subscribers, 18. In the Report for 1961 the number of members was 447 and that of subscribers 2,046. By then the original ban on any "Common Novel" had been relaxed: in 1961 the issues of fiction were 146,512; history and biography the next largest after chil- dren's books, 3,239; theology, 497. At the Leeds Library established in 1768, one of the few surviving libraries of this kind in Eng- land, the proprietors are limited to 500, but mem- bers of families of proprietors may use the library on payment of an extra fee. 18 The source of the date for Londonderry is Colby, Ordnance Survey of the County of London- derry, I (1837), 150, as given in Beckwith, op. cit., p. 98. 1 In the forthcoming extensive study of the li- braries in England it is planned to offer explana- tions of the social forces determining the extent and kind of library facilities. Scanty vestiges of evidence, however, greatly complicate any final assessments. '1 See my article "The Eighteenth-century Fore- runner of the London Library," Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America, 54 (1960), 89- 100. 1" Dr. Thomas Wall remarks (in a personal com- munication) that there were many commercial circulating libraries attached to drug shops and bookstores in the nineteenth century and lists
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that a number of booksellers in various parts of the country before 1800 simply maintained an informal rental activity with a single shelf or two without ad- vertising or leaving other record. For various and complex reasons, the popu- lar library movement in Ireland seems to have found momentum later than in England.20 WELSH CIRCULATING LIBRARIES The corresponding evidence of devel- opments in Wales is on the whole just as disappointingly limited. It is lack- ing in the catalogs found in Ireland and is actually inferior to Irish sources for the subscription institutions. But there are references to more circulating li- braries and the scholar commands a far wider background of related library facilities and cultural activities.2' For circulating libraries data come mainly from two sources: book labels (with eighteenth-century typography of course) and the indispensable Guide to All the Watering and Sea Bathing Places [in England and Wales] . . . By the Editor of the Picture of London (London, 1803). The labels contribute mostly bare names with a few details now and then: Thomas Payne, Book- seller in Wrexham; John Theophilus Potters "well chosen and extensive circulating library," Haverfordwest ("Yearly subscribers ?1-1-0"); J. H. Clark, Printer and Stationer, Usk ("To be kept Four days, for which Three Pence will be charged"); and E. Owen's Circulating Library, Wind Street, Swan- sea ("New and old Books, Pamphlets, Magazines, etc. neatly Bound, Gilt, and Letter'd: Stationery, in all its Branches: for Ready Money only. Printed by E. Owen 1792"). The Guide mentions two more: (1) in "Wind-street" Swansea: [Mrs. and Miss] Oakey's Circulating library- "Terms per an. ?1-0-0; quarter 0-10-0; month 0-6-0"2;22 and (2) Evan's circu- of a few of them, two in Drogheda, and one in Newry, county Down. 20 Obviously politico-religious tensions are prom- inent if not paramount in the complex of social forces here. One possible glimpse of causes may be noted in the clandestine teachings and small re- ligious libraries of the widespread "confraternity" activity. The Rt. Rev. Martin Brenan, M.A., for- merly of St. Patrick's College, Maynooth, now of Edenderry, county Offaly, has been kind enough to send me his brochure, The Confraternity of Christian Doctrine in Ireland: A.D. 1775-1835, (Dublin, etc., 1934) 27 pp., which is highly in- formative. Quoting from the First Report of Com- missioners on Education in Ireland, May 30, 1825, p. 88, Msgr. Brenan notes that "A lending library of religious books is usually attached to each of these Confraternities. a . . In the City of Limerick . . . on one Sunday upwards of 4000 children" [were instructed] under these auspices (p. 8). In this concentration on religious teaching and reading may perhaps be found a partial cause of the late development of secular community libraries. ' I would gratefully acknowledge the aid of the Librarian of the National Library of Wales, E. D. Jones, B.A., F.S.A., of the Keeper of Printed Books, David Jenkins, M.A., and of the Keeper of MSS. and Record, B.G. Owens; also of the City Librar- ian of Cardiff, J. E. Thomas, F.L.A., of the Refer- ence Librarian, E.H. Jones, and of the Archivist, T. J. Hopkins, at the Central Library of Cardiff. To Professor Cecil J. L. Price, University College of Swansea, and Miss Eiluned Rees, the British Museum, I am particularly indebted for numerous references and expert efforts to help in every way. Dr. Price's volume, The English Theatre in Wales in tlhe Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1948), is an indispensable background, and his article, "Polite Life in Eighteenth-century Wales," Yr Einion [The Welsh Anvil], V (1953) 89-98, provides not only succinct data in general but also a number of valu- able notes on libraries. Miss Rees from her own current study of Welsh libraries has supplied many valuable references. ' Mr. W. C. Rogers, Borough Estate Agent, Swansea, gives the additional detail that the Oakeys announced in 1802 terms for the Reading Room "where newspapers and periodicals may be read: L?-1-0 per ann., 0-10-6 per i yr., 0-6-0 per quarter, 0-2-6 per month." This is significant in disclosing quarters large enough for customers' accommoda- tion.
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 307 lating library-"terms: per an. 1 6s., half year 8/6, month 2/, single volume 3d." Commenting on these, the author of the Guide observes, "Though the scholar would be disappointed, those who seek only for amusement will be sufficiently gratified" by the offerings of Oakey and Evans (p. 344). The Guide refers to another library at Tenby stating that "the circulating library kept by Mr. Griffiths furnishes a species of entertainment which is not more rational than necessary in a place which abounds with as many seques- tered walks. Mr. Griffith's terms are moderate and he accommodates his sub- scribers with the use of London papers" (p. 362). All these were in operation by 1803 at least and none is described as newly established. Others began to appear in the first two decades of the nineteenth century, such as John Cox's at Aberystwyth dating from the 1810's (book label at the National Library of Wales). A decade earlier the Guide (p. 2) had rather accusingly noted that-"a good library here [at Aberystwyth] would be a valuable acquisition, as the social amusements are few"! Most novel of any circulatifig enter- prise on record was the service offered for assorted needs by Thomas Wood on Pride Hill, Shrewsbury, printer of the Shrewsbury Chronicle 1772-1801: in September, 1772, he engaged one Daniel Morris, Welshman, to promote his news- paper throughout Montgomeryshire, at the same time peddling patent medi- cines and developing trade for his itin- erant circulating book department by distributing Wood's catalog. After twelve weeks the enterprising salesman disappeared forever with five pounds collected from his various ministrations. That was the end of Wood's circulating library in Wales. But for three months at least he became a conspicuous fea- ture in Welsh library history both for novelty and for a diverting and precious fragment in the record. In the Shrews- bury Chronicle for May 22, 1773, runs his advertisement: "Lately was pub- lished a Catalogue of Wood's Circulat- ing of a valuable collection of books in Polite Literature calculated to amuse and entertain readers in general." Sub- scribers were to pay 12s. per year or 3s. 6d. per quarter. They were to give their names and addresses and were not to lend to non-subscribers. The maxi- mum number allowed at one time was two volumes, to be kept no longer than six days. Plays and other pamphlets were ld. per day to be kept only two days.23 The sequel to Wood's enterprise and his trust in the resourceful traveling salesman was understandable rage over Morris' disappearance, and the ab- sconder's description was published in the Chronicle with the offer of a re- ward of two guineas to anyone who would seize the rascal and "lodge him in any one of his Majesty's gaols." So end- ed Wood's venture with roving vendors, and this is the end of the brief record of Welsh circulating libraries. COWBRIDGE BOOK SOCIETY Even less numerous than the circulat- ing libraries were the non-profit sub- scription establishments. In fact, after citing the name of the Pembroke Book Society (which could be a book club without a stable collection) the record exists for one solitary institution, the Cowbridge Book Society. Fortunately, a well-nigh priceless record of this has survived, the manuscript vellum-bound volume, "The Register belonging to the ' Price's article cited in n. 21 above is the source for this incident, pp. 95-96.
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Lending Library in the Town of Cow- bridge." As described by Rev. Ewart Lewis, the documents therein include the legal instruments of the foundation, a catalog of its contents, some financial accounts and memoranda, and the min- utes of the trustees' meetings for the extraordinary span of years 1714- 1848.24 This is one of the three or four most extensive records of such a nature in the British Isles, rivaling those of the Linen Hall Library. Established as one of the original four diocesan libraries by the S.P.C.K. (Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge) in 1711, it was, by the Deed of Settlement, con- trolled by eleven clergyman and seven- teen laymen as trustees. Although no catalog of the initial store of books is extant, the value of the collection was ?66-12-0. One can visualize the pic- turesque beginnings as the books in four stout wooden chests assembled some- where in England, bumped over the road to Bristol, thence were carried by boat to Cardiff, and again loaded upon a wagon for the final journey to Cow- bridge, then the center of Glamorgan life. Since there was no precedent for such a program, the elaborate provi- sions in the Deed for its administration are impressive testimony to careful planning. Unlike most parochial librar- ies in England, this was designed for loans.25 Besides the trustees and any clergyman or schoolmaster living with- in ten miles of Cowbridge, any person subscribing ten shillings in cash or the equivalent in books could borrow two volumes at a time on deposit of the amount specified on the title-page. Fo- lios could be kept out two months and smaller sizes for one half that time. But serious students who planned to pub- lish might have as many as six titles within a four-month period on condi- tion that they present a well-bound copy of their published work. The whole col- lection, housed in the room over the vestry of the church, was to be open from 10 A.M. to noon on Cowbridge market days under the supervision of an appointed keeper or reliable deputy. The same "Register" includes a cata- log of the holdings of about 1745 with the bookseller's price and the lending deposit value (one quarter more than the cost) for each title. As would be ex- pected, theology and other religious works such as volumes of sermons and church history predominated, but works in philosophy included Bacon, Locke, Cudworth, Henry More, Grotius, and Malebranche. Among about 150 titles added by gift after the first foundation were a number of important general secular histories and some ancient class- ics. None of the whole eighteenth-cen- tury collection, except an original edi- tion of Foxe's Martyrs, has now sur- vived. On the actual operation of the library from 1711 to 1764, involving the ac- tivity of lending, no information is pre- served. By 1764, however, the death of most of the trustees, lack of funds, and damage from rain to the books them- selves had created a crisis. The solu- tion proved to be reorganization on a non-clerical basis with much more liber- al rules for borrowing. On the Septem- 2 "The Cowbridge Diocesan Library, 1711- 1848," Journal of the Historical Society of the Church in Wales, IV (1954), 36-44, and VII (1957), 80-91. S For an authoritative account of the libraries in England see The Parochial Libraries of the Church of England (London: Faith Press Ltd., 1959), ex- cellently edited with a historical introduction by Neil R. Ker, M.A., for the Central Council for the Care of Churches.
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 309 ber 20, 1764, forty-four subscribers adopted "Rules and Orders" with this Preamble: "For the encouragement of Litera- ture, for the establishing of a friendly Society to be called the Cowbridge Book Society, for the benefit of the Free- School and the Town of Cowbridge and for the accommodation & entertain- ment of the clergy, gentlemen and others of the county of Glamorgan will- ing and desirous to promote those pur- poses . . ." twelve provisions were or- dered. Among these were the initial subscription of a guinea in cash or equiv- alent in books, and volumes could be borrowed with 2s. 6d. deposit and could be detained beyond the previous limits under penalty of only 6d. per month. Thus the transition from a diocesan li- brary to a typical subscription estab- lishment was accomplished. Control was lodged in the entire membership which met annually for a dinner at the Bear Inn. Ladies were explicitly ad- mitted to membership with loan privi- leges. Under the new regime a good many general works of literature were ac- quired and a broadly social purpose and tone dominated the society. But next to nothing is known of its history up to 1817 when a new Cowbridge Clerical Book Club was organized and the older society passed into a decline. Finally, in 1848 its library of perhaps 250-300 titles was removed at the re- quest of the church, and that was the end. In assessing the chequered for- tunes of the organization, the Rev. Mr. Lewis observes that while a few fam- ilies made Cowbridge the center of a vigorous intellectual life in the eight- eenth century, diaries and other docu- ments too clearly hint that sporting in- terests of all kinds were much stronger than the pursuit of learning and that the description of the inhabitants of Cow- bridge as "a glorious race of drinkers" was true of the whole Vale of Glamor- gan! READING SOCIETIES AND PAROCHIAL LIBRARIES To such scanty accounts must be added a few hopeful glimpses of the closely related institution, the book club or reading society, which if true to type attempted no stable collection but dis- posed annually of its acquisitions.26 One such glimpse is a simple statement in Benjamin H. Malkin's The Scenery, Antiquities, and Biography of South Wales (London, 1804): "There are several book societies at Merthyr Tyd- vil, and a philosophical society is in its infancy" (p. 181). Although the name "society" was more usually applied to stable collections like the one at Cow- bridge, it seems more probable that in a single community the organizations were book clubs with the membership of each limited to about twelve persons. Two other brief references leave no doubt of the nature of the clubs. In the diary of Richard Fenton is an account in 1804 of an evening he spent in hear- ing Reverend Henry T. Payne of Llan- bedr describe the book club at Crickhow- ell.7 The other is more specific and much more significant because of its early date: Thomas Morgan of Henllan in the valuable manuscript catalog of 26The only study of book clubs hitherto pub- lished is my article, "A Bookseller's Record of Eighteenth-century Book Clubs," The Library, 5th ser., XIV (1960), 278-87. A comprehensive survey of them is now in progress. 27 "Tours in Wales (1804-13) by Richard Fenton, Edited from his Ms. Journals in the Cardiff Free Library," by John Fisher, B.D., Cambrian Archae- ological Association, 1917.
310 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY his library notes under the years 1752 and 1753: "subscribed to Reading So- ciety Carmarthen 0-2-6"; and he dilates sadly on the loss of this association af- ter he moved to Morley, Yorkshire, in 1766: "I was a member for some years in Wales of such a club or reading so- ciety; & I cd wish yt I had an opportu- nity again to be one."28 Such evidence from three different counties suggests that book clubs were widespread in Wales, although no such records have come to light in Ireland. Wales had no library comparable to the great collection of Trinity College, Dublin; none rivaling the Marsh or the libraries of learned societies, and none in the class with the proprietary institu- tions at Cork, Dublin, and Belfast. However, a number of movements for the widespread infusion of popular edu- cation, mostly religious, stimulated the formation of libraries. Of first impor- tance was the dramatic and powerful penetration of the S.P.C.K. This had more tangibly profound effects in Wales than in any other part of the British dominions.29 No less than fifty-six pa- rochial libraries were established in the principality; and although these so- called "standing" libraries were de- signed for the clerical incumbent's pri- vate reading, there were also S.P.C.K. lending libraries which have not yet re- ceived their just due. The enlightening Catalogue of Libraries in the Diocese of St. David's (Carmarthen, 1807) lists the contents of five lending as well as those of twenty-six restricted collec- tions. If each of the dioceses had this number, a total of twenty lending cen- ters would thus have been established. But no records about them have come to light. However, the country-wide renascence of interest in religious teach- ing and in reading is well known. It was promoted in Wales by the S.P.C.K., not only through a network of libraries but also by various kinds of home and itinerant schools and by printing books in both English and Welsh. By setting the example of lending libraries which were expressly religious, the S.P.C.K. inevitably stimulated the formation of other kinds of community collections. PRIVATE LIBRARIES AND THE GROWTH OF LITERACY The effects of this widespread serious reading is strikingly seen also in the large number of records of private li- braries that have survived.30 Besides the invaluable manuscript register of Thomas Morgan's acquisitions of over thirty years, the unique diary record of a student's reading in Thomas Bey- non's Common-place Book lists no less than 419 volumes "read" in the four- year period 1763-67, when he was nine- teen to twenty-three years of age.3" This 2 N.L.W. MS. 5457 A, Catalogue of Thomas Morgan's Library, showing the purchase with prices of about 450 volumes by year from 1741 to 1772. 9 My figure of fifty-six parochial libraries is de- rived from the list of all such libraries in the British Isles as given in the Report of the Special Committee on Public Libraries, 1849, with a few additions from other sources. The attempt to deny the name "parochial" to the libraries founded by the associates of Dr. Bray after 1753 seems to me fallacious. The best recent sources for S.P.C.K. influence are the volumes of Mary Clement, Correspondence and Minutes of the S.P.C.K. Relating to Wales, 1699-1740, (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1952), and The S.P.C.K. and Wales, 1699-1740 (London: S.P.C.K., 1954). 30About half of these are still in manuscript, some uncataloged, in N.L.W. An extensive list from various sources seems hardly relevant enough to reproduce here. 'R. George Thomas, "The Complete Reading List of a Carmarthenshire Student, 1763-7," Jour- nal of the National Library of Wales, IX (1955- 56), 354-64.
LENDING LIBRARIES IN IRELAND AND WALES 311 record reveals the obvious pursuit of a systematic course of self-improvement. Another interesting record is that of John Griffiths who kept a register of books that he lent from his private li- brary.32 The records of private libraries are quite revealing; there must be about fifteen catalogs extant. Although they are mainly clerical in content, they show other interests, particularly in general history and in ancient languages, includ- ing Oriental languages.33 Other movements tended to create a new demand for access to books. The most general impetus came from "an- glicizing" of Welsh gentry and more prosperous townfolk. Assembly rooms, coffee houses, theatres, dress and man- ners, and newspapers and books-all were eagerly imitated from fashionable London. (This had an effect similar to the importation of English ways in eighteenth-century Ireland.) The im- provement of roads, the vogue of ro- mantic scenery, and the sudden popu- larity of sea-bathing effected the dis- covery of Wales as a tourist Mecca, with special influx to the attractive spots on the coast and the resulting develop- ment of shore resorts. By the end of the century Aberystwyth, Barmouth, Beau- maris, Abergele, Swansea, and Tenby had become popular watering places.34 Hence it would be strange if circulating libraries did not spring up to meet the demand in Wales as they did in a score of new spas in England. Add to these social forces the increasing circulation of the border newspapers from Liver- pool, Chester, Shrewsbury, Hereford, Gloucester, and Bristol,35 and the total result is a rapid rise in a reading public which in that era sought satisfaction in book clubs, and in both commercial and 32 George Eyre Evans, "John Griffiths, Clericus: His Curious Register and Diary," Transactions of the Carmarthenshire Antiquarian Society and Field Club, II (1906-7), 190, 192, 195. In "two tiny vellum-bound pocket books" two of the nine sec- tions compiled by Mr. Griffiths in his parish of Llandyssilio are those captioned "Catalogue of all the Books in my Possession 1764" (a total of 864) and "Books Lended" beginning in 1763 and con- tinuing until 1796. From "many hundreds of trans- actions" during this period the author selects the following as "fair specimens": "Alarm to the un- converted," with [lent to] Thos. Melchior; "War with the Devil," at Pontvane; 'Travel of Ungodli- ness," with Lewis Lewis; "Aristotle," with Sarah Evans, and later with Miss Mary Lewis, Wm. Harry, and Mrs. Lloyd; "The Welchman's Candle," with Griffith, ye taylor; Greek Testament, with Saml. Griffiths of Hendre; and about forty more. On Dec. 8, 1772, he recorded "85 books out" and on Feb. 16, 1774, "106 books, or more." Such a one-man lending library is probably unique-cer- tainly we have nothing comparable; and the size of his collection is seldom matched in the records of the eighteenth century. What is particularly sig- nificant is the number of persons to whom he made loans. It should be emphasized also that other records of loans are almost non-existent: no such evidence of circulating libraries in England has survived and only one record of a proprietary in- stitution. See my Borrowing from the Bristol Li- brary 1773-1784: A Unique Record of Reading Vogues, (Charlottesville, 1960). '3 The presence of Hebrew, Arabic, and Sanskrit books in the libraries of Welsh clergyman is highly interesting. We assume that the library owners ac- quired the knowledge of these to some degree at the universities, but that they should have carried such books to remote Welsh parishes is worthy of note. ' Dr. Price has suggested in personal communi- cation Barmouth, Beaumaris, and Abergele as likely place for libraries, in addition to the other three cited by the Guide. 'We might presume that the direction of influ- ence would be reversed, that is, newspaper circu- lation would increase with growing literacy and expanding desire to learn English ways, including proficiency in the language. Actually the two forces are reciprocal. The newspapers, for instance, tried more and more to interest Welsh readers with news of concern to them and some carried adver- tisements in Welsh. Closely related is the increase of printers throughout Wales. Ifano Jones, A His- tory of Printing and Printers in Wales and Mon- mouthshire to 1810 . . . (Cardiff: William Lewis, 1925) lists eighty-seven printers in twenty-four places in the eighteenth century.
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY non-profit subscription libraries.36 That we cannot today recover more than a fraction of the whole dramatic develop- ment is merely another proof of time's ravages with the essential stuff of the human story. " Valuable testimony to private libraries at this time in the small town of Newton, Montgomery- shire, is afforded in Robert Owen's significant auto- biography: in the late 1770's, when he was only seven and eight years old (admittedly an infant prodigy), he relates: "I had the libraries of the clergyman, physician, and lawyer-the learned men of the town-thrown open to me, with permission to take home any volume which I liked, and I made full use of the liberty given to me. Among the books which I selected at this period were Robin- sona Crusoe, Philip Quarle, Pilgrim's Progress, Para- dise Lost, Hervey's Meditations among the Tombs, Young's Night Thoughts, Richardson's, and all oth- er standard novels.... Then I read Cook's, and all the other circumnavigators' voyages,-The His- tory of the World-Rollin's Ancient History,-and all the lives I could meet with of the philosophers and great men" (The Life of Robert Owen, by Himself [New York, 1920], p. 4). This kind of evidence is almost completely lack- ing for Ireland.