Mapping the Infoscape of LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics Bharat Mehra School of Information Sciences , University of Tennessee , Email: bmehra@utk.edu William Travis Tidwell School of Information Sciences , University of Tennessee , Email: williamtidwell@sevier.org The article explores the information landscape (i.e., infoscape) of library and informa- tion science (LIS) courses for intersections of health-gender and health-sexual orien- tation topics, concerns, and issues. This research was considered important because health information support services essential in today's society must include margin- alized gender and sexual orientation-related content that is deemed taboo in an all- pervasive patriarchal and heterosexist culture. Research methods involved a content analysis of bibliographic course descriptions available on the homepages of graduate programs in Canada and the United States that are accredited by the American Library Association. Syllabi for LIS courses on health information support services, gender, and sexual orientation were also studied. Findings map the existing infoscape surrounding the teaching of health information support services in LIS and identify future directions for inclusion of gender and sexual orientation topics in the LIS curriculum. Introduction Health are essential information in today's support society services and are essential in today's society and it is urgent that their development, pro- vision, and delivery reflect progressive cultural values in the 21st century (Braa, Monteiro, & Sahay, 2004; Mehra & Des- sel, 2011; Saxena, Thornicroft, Knapp, & Whiteford, 2007). This is especially true regarding gender and sexual orientation- related content (e.g., information needs, values, and practices) that is considered taboo owing to patriarchal norms and het- erosexist assumptions all-pervasive in our society and culture (Lugg, 2003; Reardon, 2001; Skelton, 2001). The intent of the article is to explore the information land- scape (i.e., infoscape) of library and infor- mation science (LIS) courses for intersec- tions of health-gender and health-sexual orientation topics, concerns, and issues. The strategy of mapping to study the in- foscape that LIS programs create via the public domain of the Internet in represent- ing information about the courses they of- fer on their websites is explored. The Mer- riam-Webster Dictionary (2004) defines the term "mapping" as the act or process of making a map and identifies the following meanings of a map: as something that rep- resents with a clarity suggestive of a map (noun); to plan in detail (transitive verb); and to assign in a relation or connection to another (intransitive verb) [italics added]. These meanings of mapping have been applied in LIS to represent: a conceptual analysis of disciplinary domains (e.g., sci- ence) (Klavans & Boyack, 2009); tools for understanding of information-related pat- terns in software development and use in various areas (Cobo, López-Herrera, Her- rera- Viedma, & Herrera, 2011); methods to create local, regional, and global maps (Klavans & Boyack, 2011); and, tech- niques to represent bibliometric research (Nees, Waltman, Dekker, & Berg, 2010; van Eck, Waltman, Dekker, & van den J. of Education for Library and Infomiation Science, Vol. 55, No. 3 - (Summer) July 2014 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2014 Association for Library and Information Science Education 191
1 92 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Berg, 2010). This article adopts the term "map" in its conceptual meaning from popular vernacular and integrates its vari- ous dimensions (identified above) to just mean organizing or systematizing infor- mation in a way that reveals trends and patterns in a collection of LIS courses. The concept of LIS is used with reference to the entire gamut of information creation- organization-management-dissemination processes and their education in the con- temporary context. The term infoscape (etymology = info + scape) refers to the virtual and physi- cal landscape of information and its in- teractions (Skovira & University, 2004). Mapping the infoscape of LIS course rep- resentations on the web (as conducted in this research) is important for identifying the patterns and course counts to track the intersections of health-gender and health- sexual orientation topics in the LIS curri- cula across the master's degree programs in Canada and the United States. The con- cept of infoscape helps holistically relate to an informational ecology or the envi- ronment of information use and informa- tion creation from the enterprise level to the personal level (in this case from the programmatic level in the LIS schools to the individual course level) (Davenport & Prusak, 1997; Hasenjager, 1996; Nardi & O'Day, 1999). Documenting the public representations of courses on the websites of LIS programs is significant since the In- ternet has now become unequivocally the primary information resource tool used by diverse populations in nearly every part of the world (Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, & Cam- mack, 2004; Peterson & Fretz, 2003; Rice, 2006). It is often the first place where po- tential students and other stakeholders will search and find information about LIS pro- grams (Johnson, 2007; Manzari & Trini- dad-Christensen, 2006). Analyzing what LIS programs are doing (or not doing) in representing information about their pro- grams on the publicly accessible online domain can potentially identify market- ing and public relations strategies for the profession as a whole, and by individual programs, to showcase their offerings and attract the best of students to their ranks (Kim & Sin, 2006; Wilde & Epperson, 2006). Literature Review An overview of the current health lit- erature in LIS was developed in two steps: first, a review of the literature with LIS as a broad concept was conducted, encom- passing theoretical and practical pursuits and the intersections therein, regarding health-gender and health-sexual orienta- tion topics; second, a similar review of the literature was done but where LIS was instead more narrowly viewed as it re- lates specifically to education. In both the strategies it was evident that while much has been written in the field and each of the studied topics individually (i.e., LIS, health, and gender/sexual orientation separately), searching the literature for an intersection between LIS, health, and gender/sexual orientation topics does not produce a comparable wealth of available research. This section highlights the clear trends that were found within this limited pool of literature. A review of existing literature on the intersection of health-gender and health- sexual orientation topics in the field of LIS provided diverse and multi-faceted results. The importance of these topics and the findings can be better understood in terms of a categorization scheme of the themes that emerged. Each work obvi- ously had representation of multiple cat- egories though the list of broad thematic categories was created from the topic/ subject that emerged in the forefront based on an analysis of the descriptions in the title, abstract, and a review of the work. The emerging thematic categories allowed the authors to coalesce additional articles that were found into spheres of similar topics based on how they included health information and gender/sexual orienta- tion content, and these spheres are akin
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 1 93 to the larger schools of thought and areas of interest found in LIS as a whole. The thematic categories are by no means ex- clusive but serve as a tool to make sense of the literature reviewed. Such a catego- rization scheme of health information can provide a potential framework to represent and market the LIS courses on intersec- tions of health-gender and health-sexual orientation topics. The first category included articles that are about a health issue, symptom, or disease-specific to particular populations based on gender and/or sexual orientation. This is akin to Buckland's (1991) infor- mation in terms of knowledge definition, since these articles represented health and gender/sexual orientation topics as the sub- ject of the information (i.e. not the people involved, such as the user or the mediator). The category encompassed articles close- ly related to gender, including those that discussed pregnancy and maternal health (Pierce 2004) and endometriosis (Deevey 2005), and those that are traditionally linked to sexual orientation, such as HIV/ AIDS (Harris, Veinot, & Bella. 2010). The category has corresponding similarities with the system-centric point of view in equating the "system" with the "disease" and focusing on the traits and characteris- tics of the disease without much attention to the person experiencing the disease or ailment. On the other side of the equation, the second thematic category included articles that approached the intersection of health- gender and/or health-sexual orientation topics from the point of view or perspec- tive of the information user. Whereas the previous thematic category focused on the disease per se, the articles in this user- centric category considered the ways con- sumers of information are involved in the access and use of health information based on gender/sexual orientation. Information needs, information seeking, information searching, information use, and attitudes of users within broader human information behavior research (Saleh & Lasisi, 2011) were key sub-topics within this thematic category. Articles included those about the information needs of particular popu- lations such as Anasi and Nwalo's (2012) exploration of the reproductive health in- formation needs of adolescent girls in Ni- gerian public secondary schools. Others examined Kuhlthau's information search process (ISP) (1994) such as Genuis' (2012) use of social positioning theory as a lens to understand women's health- related information seeking and decision- making and how they find and make sense of medical information. Another example was Warner and Procaccino's (2004) use of the ISP as a model to assess women's behaviors in seeking health and wellness information. Yoo and Robbins (2008) pro- vided an insightful examination of how certain groups of women search for health information on the Web. Also included in this thematic category were articles on the information seeking behavior of women looking for treatments for specific dis- eases (e.g., symptomatic uterine fibroids) (Ankem, 2007). Further, included in this category were articles such as Odusanya and Bankole's (2006) study of resources Nigerian secondary school students use and their attitudes regarding HIV/AIDS and McKay's (201 1 ) analysis of the health information needs specific to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) in- formation seekers. A third and closely-related thematic category grouped articles that examined how information mediators directly ad- dress issues pertaining to the intersection of health-gender and/or health-sexual ori- entation topics. These included articles on the strategies information profession- als use to provide access to information related to particular diseases to the af- fected gender/sexual orientation-specific populations. Researchers studied the ways in which teachers, healthcare profession- als, librarians, aid workers, and others di- rectly affected the consumption of health information by individuals according to their needs keeping in perspective the us-
1 94 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ers' gender and/or sexual orientation. Ex- amples in this thematic category included a project providing information access to select community-based women's health agencies (Huber, Peek, Hughes, & Little, 2003); Allison's (2007) examination of the important roles librarians play in the dissemination and use of biomedical in- formation; Fikar and Keith's (2004) work on the perceptions of medical librarians in assisting LGBT healthcare workers; and, Levine's (2002) study of librarians and sex education that included discussions on health, gender, and sexual orientation. There was also a tendency in some articles in this thematic category to focus on the attitudes, values, and practices of informa- tion mediators, such as Baker, Case, and Policicchio's (2003) research that explored ways in which information professionals provide access to health-related informa- tion to female inner-city sex workers. The fourth thematic category included articles that addressed health-gender and / or health-sexual orientation topics from the institutional standpoint. These identi- fied information-related institutions in a wide range of settings, from traditional public and school libraries to hospitals and governments. The research in these ar- ticles pertained to how the institutions as- sisted populations based on gender/sexual orientation-specific needs. An example of such an article examined how school li- brarians addressed and provided access to LGBT-themed literature (Hughes-Hassell, Overberg, & Harris, 2013). Other articles included how populations distinguished by gender and/or sexual orientation used information-related institutions, such as a historical overview of how women use public libraries for information on woman- centric health issues (Apple 2012). Also found were articles that explored how in- formation-related institutions served as a bridge between the users and information, such as an analysis of Canadian provincial governments' use of the Internet to pro- vide information for women on domestic violence (Wathen & McKeown 2010) or a study of how the attitudes held by a com- munity of women in Nigeria regarding HIV/AIDS had repercussions for public libraries (Shabi 2012). Another less common thematic cat- egory included articles on the organization and retrieval of information as it related to the intersections of health-gender and/or health-sexual orientation topics. This in- volved ways in which health-related infor- mation itself was directly organized, such as López-Huertas and Ramirez's (2007) discussion of terminology and indexing - specifically in gender thesauri - regarding the body and health of women. It also in- cluded a broader approach to information packaging, such as Pinho and Guimarães' (2012) analysis of the ways sexual ori- entation is treated in Brazilian indexing languages, which also discussed health- related issues. Additional studies focused on information resources and included an article by Deevey (2005), who provided details on where to locate information on the gender-specific disease, endometrio- sis, and highlighted the necessity of infor- mation mediators for those suffering from the disease. Another example was Gross, Goldsmith, and Carruth's (2008) work that analyzed young adult literature's at- titudes toward HIV/AIDS and gay and les- bian themes in the sample studied. The final thematic category was the most pertinent to this particular study, namely, those articles which directly discussed the intersections of health-gender and/or health-sexual orientation and LIS educa- tion. These articles focused on health, gen- der, and/or sexual orientation in the LIS educational setting and their importance vis-à-vis the instruction and training of LIS professionals. Some of the articles found had explicit connections between health- gender and/or health-sexual orientation topics, such as Mehra and Dessel's (201 1) analysis of community health information services for those with HIV/AIDS and the role of LIS education in developing these services. Others focused more closely on one of the topics (i.e. health, gender, or
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 1 95 sexual orientation), but included an inter- section between health and gender/sexual orientation. For example, Detlefsen and Huber's (1991) work on the way HIV/ AIDS is discussed in the LIS classroom, an analysis which included mention of both gender and sexual orientation. De- tlefsen and Gal vin (1986) provided an examination of health science/biomedical librarianship education, wherein the role of women (i.e. gender) was included in the conversation surrounding LIS scholarship. Mehra and Braquet's (2011) research on the reference services for LGBT and ques- tioning students included a discussion of both LIS education (regarding community involvement) and the health of students. Methodology In order to pinpoint the LIS courses with health, gender, and sexual orientation-re- lated topics, during September-December 2012 a content analysis was conducted of the bibliographic course descriptions on the homepages of the 53 graduate programs in Canada and the United States that are accredited by the American Library Asso- ciation (ALA). Though the bibliographic course descriptions ranged in length from a handful of sentences to several pages of detailed information, they were found ap- propriate for this analysis, as they are pub- licly accessible and represented online the pithiest summaries of a course's content. Ease of access was deemed as particularly important. Even though the bibliographic course descriptions simply do not allow for in-depth understanding of course con- tent and approach, yet, for this study, the goal was to see what could be discovered simply from a program's homepage, with- out any direct contact with the faculty or staff from an individual LIS program. Ad- ditionally, within the limited descriptions, what the various LIS programs include, what they exclude are revealed, as are any intentional or unintentional biases regard- ing gender and sexual orientation topics, as reflected on their web course represen- tations. After this initial step was complet- ed, the descriptions were first examined through a health-oriented lens. The biblio- graphic descriptions were searched using keyword terms related to health content (e.g. "health" and "medic"), and after these were compiled, they were in turn searched for keyword terms that were related to gen- der and sexual orientation content (e.g., "wome/woma," "fem," and "reproduct" for courses with gender content; "sexual minorit," "gay," "lesbian," and "LGBT/ GLBT" for sexual orientation content). For a more holistic approach, the search was conducted from different angles as well. The research strategy included a sec- ond, gender-oriented lens, where the bib- liographic descriptions were searched for gender keyword terms first, followed by a search for health-related content. A third, sexual orientation-oriented lens, was also employed where the descriptions were searched for sexual orientation keyword terms and then health terms. Using this approach, no overlap was discovered between health and gender courses, and the same was true for health and sexual orientation courses. The search was then expanded to include the syllabi of courses identified in the first phase of each lens (i.e. courses with health-related keyword terms, courses with gender- related keyword terms, and courses with sexual orientation-related keyword terms). As with the bibliographic course descrip- tions, the goal was to locate the syllabi without assistance from the faculty or staff of the LIS programs, so only those courses for which syllabi could be found online were considered in this study. A reflective analysis of these course syllabi mapped the infoscape surrounding the teaching of gender and sexual orientation topics in LIS courses on health information support services and vice-versa. Some limitations of this research in- clude a focus of data collection only on courses considered part of the ALA-ac- credited master's degree. Even though a range of bibliographic course descriptions
1 96 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE was found (mostly short blurbs, although a few included course objectives and course content covered), all the relevant course syllabi were not made publicly accessible on the LIS program website. Some is- sues that emerged include the following: First, it was not always clear if the website course description itself was outdated and incomplete or it was the most current and complete version for the individual cours- es. Second, it was not clear if the courses described on the LIS program website had been offered recently or not been of- fered for a long time. The assumption was that they would have been removed from the public resource if the latter was true, otherwise, it would be quite misleading and show poorly on the individual LIS program. However, from the information found, some materials were for courses taught a while back, and the suggestion for administrators and developers of the LIS program websites is that they must make efforts to rectify such lapses. Moreover, if health, gender, and sexual orientation topics were included in a "special topic course" with a generic number then that might not have been included in the data- set that was studied. Findings Appendix 1-3 provides a list of LIS course titles with health, gender, and sexual orientation-related content respec- tively. Table 1 summarizes health-related courses in LIS programs in Canada and United States. One hundred and forty-five courses in 47 programs were found on the websites with health-related content based on the analysis of the bibliographic de- scriptions available on the homepages of LIS programs in Canada and the United States (a total of 53 programs). However, only 40 courses (27.60%) had their syllabi available online without password access to the general public. In addition, within this pool of bibliographic course descrip- tions, there were no courses identified in the collection that had vocabularies asso- ciated with intersections of health-gender or health-sexual orientation content. Table 2 summarizes gender-related courses in LIS programs in Canada and United States. Thirty-one courses in 13 programs were found on the websites with gender-related content based on the analy- sis of the bibliographic descriptions avail- able on the homepages of LIS programs in Canada and the United States (a total of 53 programs). However, only 10 courses (32.26%) had their syllabi available online without password access to the general public. In addition, within this limited pool of bibliographic course descriptions, there were no courses identified in the collection that had vocabularies associated with in- tersections of gender-health content. Table 3 summarizes sexual orientation- related courses in LIS programs in Canada and United States. Seven courses in four programs were found on the websites with Table 1 . Health-related LIS Courses. Number of LIS Number of LIS Programs Total Number of Number of Programs with ONE with MORE THAN ONE LIS Courses with LIS Programs Health-Related Course Health-Related Course Health-Related Content Canada 7 1 5 [2, 2, 3, 6, 7] 21 United States 46 14 27(2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2, 124 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5, 7, 8, 9, 1 7] TOTAL 53 15 32 1 45 courses in 47 programs with 40 online syllabi
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 1 97 Table 2. Gender-related LIS Courses. Number of LIS Number of LIS Programs Total Number of Number of Programs with ONE with MORE THAN ONE LIS Courses with LIS Programs Gender Course Gender Course Gender Content Canada 7 0 3 [2, 4, 5] 1J United States 46 6 4 [2, 2, 2, 8] 20 TOTAL 53 6 7 31 courses in 1 3 programs with 10 online syllabi sexual orientation-related content based on the analysis of the bibliographic de- scriptions available on the homepages of LIS programs in Canada and the United States (a total of 53 programs). However, only one course (14.29%) had its syllabus available online without password access to the general public. In addition, within this limited pool of bibliographic course descriptions, there were no courses identi- fied in the collection that had vocabular- ies associated with intersections of sexual orientation-health content. With the expansion of the dataset to include publicly accessible syllabi of the courses already identified by their bib- liographic descriptions, even though the number of courses shrank, the increased amount of data meant that there was an increased potential to find intersections of health-gender and/or health-sexual orien- tation content in the LIS courses. Includ- ing the syllabi resulted in more than just the succinct, single paragraph summaries that the researchers often found in the bulk of bibliographic course descriptions. Content analysis now included lecture top- ics, assigned and suggested readings, and homework assignments, amongst other information, as a result of the widened scope. Analysis of the LIS health course syllabi showed four courses with gender- related content and one course with sexual orientation-related content. Analysis of gender course syllabi showed one course with health-related content, and an analy- sis of one sexual orientation course syl- labus found no course with health-related content. Discussion The bibliographic course descriptions for none of the health courses contained intersections of content with gender and/ or sexual orientation vocabularies or vice- versa, and although this is disappointing the results are still significant, as they reveal a need for greater integration of these topics in LIS courses. This being said, there still exists a potential to include gender/sexual orientation-related topics Table 3. Sexual-orientation-related LIS Courses. Number of LIS Number of LIS Programs Total Number of Programs with ONE with MORE THAN ONE LIS Courses with Sexual Number of Sexual Orientation- Sexual Orientation- Orientation-Related LIS Programs Related Course Related Course Content Canada 7 1 1 [2] 3 United States 46 1 1 [3] 124 TOTAL 53 2 2 7 courses in 4 programs = 1 online syllabus
1 98 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE and vocabularies in current bibliographic health course descriptions within the exist- ing framework. For example, the health- related course offered at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, "LIS 517: Consumer Health Information: Resources, Users, and Services," displays a potential opportunity to demonstrate the intersection of health- gender and health-sexual orientation top- ics. The current online bibliographic de- scription of this course includes "special domain of consumer health" and refers to the special needs of consumer health information users, ethical issues, and the way users find access to such information. To start with, terms associated with wom- en's concerns/behaviors and "lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender" populations, amongst others, can easily be included to represent a diversity of users and their in- teraction with health information resourc- es and services. Similarly, current gender/ sexual orientation courses also have the potential to include health-related vocabu- laries in their online bibliographic course descriptions. Simmons College's "LIS 530J: Information Services for Diverse Users" bibliographic course description notes the "special needs" of users, focusing on those who are "traditionally underrep- resented in information settings." Adding examples and populations related to di- versity issues including race, social class, gender, and sexual orientation should not be difficult. In such courses, terms asso- ciated with health should be included in the bibliographic course description and course content since health is a key area where information resources and services in specific health information institutions are provided to diverse users to meet their specific needs, wants, and expectations. Table 4 summarizes intersections of health-gender and health-sexual orientation content and vice-versa in LIS courses based on a content analysis of the course syllabi. Content analysis of specific course syl- labi found on the websites of the different LIS programs helped identify select ways that instructors of these courses represent- ed intersections of health, gender, and sex- ual orientation topics. Such efforts provide practical suggestions and best practices for other course instructors across various LIS programs to insert such important infor- mation into their curriculum. One example Table 4. Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation in LIS Courses. Sr. No. Course Title and University Select Example Specifics from Course Syllabi 1 . Gender in Health Course Syllabi 1.1 SI 657/757: Info. Tech. 1.1.1. Inclusion in specific assignment description [Policy As- and Global Development, sessment Paper 20%]: "A clear impacts statement that describes University of Michigan- the specific impacts your project will have, including poverty Ann Arbor impacts, inequality, gender, etc." 1.1.2. Materials for specific weeks included gender resources: (1) "For Week 9 [Urbanization and Infrastructure]: Lebanon, First Female Electrician, (2010) Produced by Karen Neksa Iguchi on behalf of United Nations Television." (2) "For Week 7 [ICTs and Development]: Anita Gurumurthy, "Promoting gender equality? Some development-related uses of ICTs by women," Develop- ment in Practice 1 6:6 (Nov 2006), pp 61 1-61 6." 1. 1.3. Under " Other Resources ": "Swasti Mitter and Celia Ng, eds. Gender and the Digital Economy: Perspectives from the Developing World (Sage 2005)." (continued)
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 1 99 Table 4 (continued). Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation in LIS Courses. Sr. No. Course Title and University Select Example Specifics from Course Syllabi 1 .2 LIS 2585: Health Consumer 1.2.1. In the " Course Introduction" and " Thematic Op- Resources and Services, tion" descriptions: "Among the "special populations'' University of Pittsburgh- whose health-related information needs will be discussed Pittsburgh . . . are gay/lesbian/bisexual people, the homeless, those with mental illnesses, pet owners, the poor, prisoners, refugees, teens, women, and men." 1.2.2. Title of specific sessions : "Session 1 3 Gender Issues in CHI Materials and Services: Services and Materials for Women; the Men's Health Movement." 1.2.3. General directions for writing assignments [Lan- guage Courtesy]: "Inclusive language: Gender-inclusive language is required in all course work. The use of re- spectful language in any situation is not a matter of politi- cal correctness but one of simple courtesy." 1.2.4. Inclusion in specific assignment description [Review Exercise 31: "Choose a magazine or newsletter that is con- sumer health-oriented . . . read at least a year's worth of it, and write an evaluative review for your colleagues . . List of magazines included: "American health for women, A Friend indeed: for women in the prime of life, Harvard women's health watch, Mayo Clinic women's health, etc." 1 .3 LS 556: Bibliography of the 1.3.1. Under "General Texts": "Women and science: Sciences, Clarion University of an annotated bibliography / Marilyn Bailey Ogilvie with Pennsylvania-Clarion Kerry Lynne Meek. Z7963.S3 035 1996." 1 .4 INF 382K: Information Resources 1.4. 1. Description of specific sessions: "February 8: Read in the Health Sciences, University Kane, pages 27-51 on diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and women's of Texas- Austin health." 2. Sexual Orientation in Health Course Syllabi 2.1 LIS 2585: Health Consumer 2. 1. 1. In the " Course Introduction " and " Thematic Op- Resources and Services, tion " descriptions: "Among the "special populations" University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh whose health-related information needs will be discussed ... are gay/lesbian/bisexual people, the homeless, those with mental illnesses, pet owners, the poor, prisoners, refugees, teens, women, and men." 2. 1.2. Title of specific sessions: "Session 14 Minority Is- sues in CHI Materials and Services: Gay/Lesbian/Bisexual Materials and Services; Services and Materials for Refu- gees." 3. Health in Gender Course Syllabi 3.1 INF 386G Gender, Technology, 3.1.1. Health-related reading included in a list of " Refer - and Information: University of enees": "Taylor, George H. (2001). Improvement in medi- Texas-Austin cal rubbing apparatus. In Carroll Pursell (Ed.), American technology (pp. 131-133). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. (Origi- nal work published 1876)." 4. Health in Sexual Orientation Course Syllabi: None.
200 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE of such an intersection was represented in the syllabus of "LIS 2585: Health Con- sumer Resources and Services," a course offered at the University of Pittsburgh, where the following introductory course description included vocabularies reflect- ing health-gender and health-sexual orien- tation topics: "Among the "special popu- lations" whose health-related information needs will be discussed are persons living with AIDS/HIV disease, children, those with chronic diseases, persons of color, the disabled, the dying, the elderly, those of limited literacy, gay/lesbian/bisexual people, the homeless, those with mental illnesses, pet owners, the poor, prisoners, refugees, teens, women, and men. The role of their family, friend, or neighborhood caregivers as information seekers will also be discussed." Another strategy adopted in this course to represent health-gender and health-sexual orientation topics was under the following "Thematic Option" descrip- tion for completing the course exercises: "IF you choose this option, you may focus ALL your written work for this class on a particular special population - i.e., per- sons living with AIDS/HIV disease, chil- dren, those with chronic diseases, persons of color, the disabled, the dying, the elder- ly, gay/lesbian/bisexual people, the home- less, those of limited literacy, those with mental illnesses, pet owners, the poor, prisoners, refugees, teens, women, men, or any other population that you would like to investigate." Such an option provided flexibility to individual students to tailor the course content and include health-gen- der and/or health-sexual orientation topics in the context of their own uniquely select- ed population and areas of interest. This course also went further to create inclusive titles of specific sessions covered during the semester to reflect health-gender and/ or health-sexual orientation topics, as seen in the following examples: "Session 13: Gender Issues in CHI Materials and Ser- vices: Services and Materials for Women; the Men's Health Movement" and "Ses- sion 14: Minority Issues in CHI Materials and Services: Gay/Lesbian/Bisexual Ma- terials and Services; Services and Materi- als for Refugees." The following example of the descrip- tion of a specific subtopic under a particular date in the calendar included in the syllabus of the University of Texas-Austin's "INF 382K: Information Resources in the Health Sciences" course provided language reflect- ing a health-gender intersection: "February 8 - Read Kane, pages 27-51 on diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and women's health." Both the "SI 657/757: Information Technology and Global Development" course offered at the University of Michi- gan-Ann Arbor, and the "LIS 2585: Health Consumer Resources and Services" course offered at the University of Pittsburgh, had language reflecting health-gender intersec- tions in their assignment description. The first course included the following select description of the "Integrative Information Assessment and Design Project: (40%)" for master's students that served as a writ- ing guideline to follow in a specific as- signment: "Working in groups of 3-4, stu- dents will be required to produce a 1 2-1 5 page (single-spaced) project proposal that: a) identifies a clearly-defined develop- ment problem, barrier, or challenge; and b) proposes an innovative programmatic, institutional, or design intervention that shows reasonable promise of addressing or improving the problem identified. Your proposal must include ... a clear impacts statement that describes the specific im- pacts your project will have, including poverty impacts, inequality, gender, etc." The second course, on the other hand, in- cluded the following select description en- titled "A note on Language Courtesy" that served as a general assignment guideline to follow in all course writings: "Inclu- sive language: Gender-inclusive language is required in all course work. The use of respectful language in any situation is not a matter of political correctness but one of simple courtesy." Representation of readings, resources, literature, and other materials reflecting
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 201 health-gender/sexual orientation intersec- tions were seen in three courses. The Uni- versity of Michigan-Ann Arbor offered the "SI 657/757: Information Technology and Global Development" course that in- cluded such information in materials for a specific week as: "Week 7 - ICTs and De- velopment: Projects and Programs (Mar. 8th) . . . Anita Gurumurthy, "Promoting gender equality? Some development- related uses of ICTs by women," Devel- opment in Practice 16:6 (Nov. 2006), pp 61 1-616." This course also included such information under "Other Resources" to be used throughout the semester: "Beyond the materials dealt with in class, there is a (huge!) variety of books, journals, blogs, lists, websites, and other online and offline resources featuring material highly inter- esting, relevant and useful to the themes of the course. We'll create a more active list of these (to which you'll be encour- aged to contribute) on the wiki section of the course Ctools site. But here's a good starting point . . ." and included the fol- lowing reading: "Swasti Mitter and Celia Ng, eds. Gender and the Digital Economy: Perspectives from the Developing World (Sage 2005)." The Clarion University in Pennsylvania offered the "LS 556: Bibli- ography of the Sciences" course that in- cluded "Women and science: an annotated bibliography/Marilyn Bailey Ogilvie with Kerry Lynne Meek. Z7963.S3 035 1996" as a representation of a resource reflect- ing a health-gender intersection under the heading "General texts" and "Specific au- diences." The University of Texas- Austin offered the gender-specific "INF 386G Gender, Technology, and Information" course that included "Taylor, George H. (2001). Improvement in medical rubbing apparatus. In Carroll Pursell (Ed.), Ameri- can technology (pp. 131-133). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. (Original work published 1 876) CD" in a reference list. Conclusion There is a limited representation of health-gender/sexual orientation intersec- tions in the existing LIS courses and fac- ulty need to extend their courses to ad- dress these important topic areas that are currently not getting addressed in the LIS curricula in Canada and the United States. Yet, efforts of select LIS programs/instruc- tors to include health-gender and/or health- sexual orientation topics in their course syllabi need to be commended. Strategies included content integration of health- gender and/or health-sexual orientation vocabularies in: (1) Introductory course description; (2) General guidelines for writ- ing all assignments; (3) Specific guidelines for completing a particular assignment; (4) Alternate option description for fulfilling course expectations; (5) Title and descrip- tion of a specific session; (6) Materials/ readings assigned for a specific week; (7) Required course text; (8) Reference list; (9) Other course resources. Based on the preference of individual instructors, such strategies can be included selectively in all courses since any aspect of information-re- lated work has a conceptual and/or thematic potential to make connections with health, gender, and sexual orientation concerns and intersections. Additionally, the authors suggest as part of a "must do" list for in- structors to include health-gender and/or health-sexual orientation content in courses that focus specifically on any one of these areas. Similar practices may also apply to represent diversity information concerning health issues related to disability, aging, or other populations who have special health needs and are discriminated against. As reflected in the data collected dur- ing this research, current efforts, although well-intentioned, are ad hoc, isolated, and fragmented and there is a need for a stra- tegic plan to develop more comprehensive and systematic development of health gender and health-sexual orientation in- tersections. Examples from limited num- ber of course syllabi do show a range of strategies that various instructors in differ- ent LIS programs have adopted to include vocabularies reflecting health-gender/
202 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE sexual orientation intersections in their courses. There is potential to include such language and content across the syllabi in other syllabi components where such de- scriptions have been missing (e.g., course objectives). They need to be integrated across the LIS curriculum more system- atically and in an encompassing manner instead of the limited ways that we have seen in a few courses. Moreover, the lack of such language in the bibliographic de- scriptions of the LIS courses online can be perceived as a callous disregard and low prioritization of these topics and concerns. A valid question that arises based on this trend is whether such a gap is intentional and if there is a need to change the existing representations to reflect the importance of these intersections in the future. Only follow-up feedback from LIS faculty, in- Figure 1. A conceptual representation of the health infoscape of LIS courses that the information professional of the 2 1 st century should be aware of. The person's context [i.e., who fee Monnation-related user, patient, or information institutions (e.g services, consumer is and her/his situation] ^ programs, policies, etc.) IBM**** Ir- - -, I Infornai™ |] tetó oxAator (e.g. demographic CSM*»") STo&ers) variables < > I ' Cüset*) r~ ~ i Information Information Health Domain « . I I « Domain . access, I organization, and retrieval aspects v - Required and Elective Courses LIS content Descriptions of ti» I LIS content (e.g., LISEdncation syllabi, bibliographie Domam descriptions, website representations, etc. ynmM¡ Informed and competent information representations, professionals etc. Informed and competent information professionals unbiased, progressive, and weö-versed in respcffldiQg to 6» needs of fte 21* century in providing cultural^ relevant servies to diverse populations.
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 203 structors, and administrators can help clar- ify answers and directions in this regard. A review of the background literature discussed earlier is mapped in Figure 1 that represents a conceptual understanding of the infoscape discussed in this article. In the context of this article's content the informational landscape comprises of the health domain and the information domain and their intersections that should be holis- tically delivered via the LIS education do- main. The goal is to educate progressively trained professionals who are responsive to the contemporary demands and expecta- tions of the 21st century with its increased awareness of intercultural and internation- al intersections and a respect for diversity and marginalized populations in a globally networked information society. The health domain includes represent- ing the entirety of the human condition and the person's context. This means pro- viding relevant medical/health informa- tion services will require an understanding of who is the user, patient, or information consumer, and, what are her/his socio-cul- tural, socio-economic, and other aspects of experience. Demographic characteris- tics (e.g., gender, sexual orientation, age, race, ethnicity, income, education, etc.) as they shape the reality of the patient or health information user are as important as the "system-centric" traits such as vari- ous aspects about the disease (e.g., symp- toms, medications, etc.) that have been considered more important by the health professional (and consequently the health information provider) in the past. The in- formation domain includes information- related institutions comprising of the in- formation mediator and the information access, organization, and retrieval systems that are getting used. The interactions be- tween these contributes to an awareness of the health infoscape that is provided by LIS education to train an informed, competent, skilled, and knowledgeable generation of professionals to meet the needs, expecta- tions, demands, and urgencies in the 21st century. In addition to the instructor-stu- dent-information literacy dynamics, an im- portant component in the LIS education domain is the creation of authoritative, current, complete, accurate, unbiased, and culturally appropriate content in its required and elective courses as well as their public web-based representations. There is a tremendous responsibility of LIS educators to insure their develop- ment and delivery in providing culturally relevant information services to diverse populations in order to send progressive and positive signals that are welcoming to all and hostile to none. Appendices Appendix 1 . Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University LS 534: Medical Librarianship University of Alabama-Tuscaloosa IST 647: Health Sciences Information and Com- University at Albany, State University of New York munications Systems LIS 520: An Introduction to Health Sciences University of Alberta-Edmonton Librarianship LIS 598: Special Topics (Consumer Health Re- University of Alberta-Edmonton sources and Services) IRLS 533: Medical Online Searching University of Arizona-Tucson IRLS 556: Health Information in Ethnic Cultural University of Arizona-Tucson Communities and Environments (continued)
204 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Appendix 1 (continued). Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University IRLS 565: Health Sciences Library Administration and University of Arizona-Tucson Practice IRLS 624: Health and Medical Informatics University of Arizona-Tucson IRLS 634: Data Management and Healthcare University of Arizona-Tucson IRLS 646: Managing Healthcare Information University of Arizona-Tucson IRLS 662: Issues in Health Information University of Arizona-Tucson LIBR 51 4E: Taxonomies: Research and Evaluation University of British Columbia-Vancouver LIBR 534: Health Information Sources and Services University of British Columbia-Vancouver LIBR 553: Understanding Information Users in Diverse University of British Columbia-Vancouver Environments M253. Medical Knowledge Representation University of California-Los Angeles M254. Medical Information Infrastructures and University of California-Los Angeles Internet Technologies M255. Medical Decision Making University of California-Los Angeles 457. Health Sciences Librarianship University of California-Los Angeles LSC 524: Information Analysis and Communication Catholic University of America-Washington, DC LSC 638: Science and Technology Information Catholic University of America-Washington, DC LSC 838: Health Sciences Literature Catholic University of America-Washington, DC LSC 871 : Health Informatics Catholic University of America-Washington, DC LS 556: Bibi iog of The Sciences Clarion University of Pennsylvania-Clarion INFO 6682: Information Seeking Behaviour Dalhousie University-Halifax INFO 6750: Health Sciences Literature and Informa- Dalhousie University-Halifax tion Sources LIS 780: Health Science Librarianship Dominican University-River Forest LIS 781 : Reference Sources in Health Sciences Dominican University-River Forest LIS 782: Seminar in Health Sciences Dominican University-River Forest LIS 802: Seminars Dominican University-River Forest INFO 634: Data Mining Drexel University-Philadelphia INFO 648: Healthcare Informatics Drexel University-Philadelphia INFO 675: Resources in the Health Sciences Drexel University-Philadelphia INFO 731: Organization & Social Issues in Healthcare Drexel University-Philadelphia Informatics INFO 732: Healthcare Informatics: Planning & Evalu- Drexel University-Philadelphia ation LIS 591 6: Health Informatics Florida State University-Tallahassee LIS 693b: Information Resources in the Health Sciences University of Hawaii-Manoa LIS 660: Information Sources & Systems in Science University of Hawaii-Manoa LIS530B: Health Sciences Information Services and University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign Resources (continued)
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 205 Appendix 1 (continued). Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University LIS590DM: Document Modeling University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590HI: Healthcare Infrastructure University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS5900N: Ontologies in Natural Science University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590SR: Ref Sources for Rare Books University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign ILLINOIS LIS590TR: Information Transfer and Collaboration University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign in Science LIS590X1 9: Building Literate Communities University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590X21 : Information Resources, Services and Technology University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign in the Aging World 021 :2 75 Health Informatics I University of Iowa-Iowa City 021 :280 Health Informatics II University of Iowa-Iowa City LIS 60620: Health Information Resources Kent State University-Kent LIS 80620: Health Information Resources Kent State University- Kent IS 539: Health Informatics University of Kentucky-Lexington LIS 639: Introduction to Medical Informatics University of Kentucky-Lexington LIS 640: Health Information Resource Services University of Kentucky-Lexington LIS 607: Health Science Sources Long Island University-New York LIS 749: Health Sciences Libraries Long Island University-New York LIS 765: Knowledge Representation Long Island University-New York LIS 7202: Resources for Science and Technology Louisiana State University LIS 7404: Health Sciences Information Centers Louisiana State University-Baton Rouge LBSC 762: Information Access in the Health Sciences University of Maryland-College Park GLIS 671 : Health Sciences Information McGill University-Montreal SI 525: Empirical Methods for Health Informatics University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 542: Introduction to Health Informatics University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 551 : Information Seeking Behavior University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 562: Microeconomics for Information Professionals University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 626: Management of Nonprofit Libraries and Information University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Services SI 627: Managing the IT Org University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 642: Advanced Topics in Health Informatics University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 653: Evidence-Based Health Information Practice University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 654: Critical Policy Issues in Health IT University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 657: Information Technology and International Develop- University of Michigan-Ann Arbor ment SI 686: User-Generated Content University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 742: Current Concepts and Case Studies in Health Infor- University of Michigan-Ann Arbor matics (continued)
206 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Appendix 1 (continued). Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University SI 757: Information Technology and International Devel- University of Michigan-Ann Arbor opment SI 786: User-Generated Content University of Michigan-Ann Arbor SI 546: Personal Privacy: Policy, Practice and Technol- University of Michigan-Ann Arbor ogy Issues SI 643: Professional Practice in Libraries and Information University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Centers SI 721 : Data Mining: Methods and Applications University of Michigan-Ann Arbor LIS 534: Resources and Services for Children State University of New York-Buffalo LIS 535: Resources and Services for Young Adults State University of New York-Buffalo LIS 586: Health Science Librarianship State University of New York-Buffalo INLS 51 5: Consumer Health Information University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill INLS 705: Health Sciences Information University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill INLS 706: Biomedical Informatics Research Review University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill INLS 748: Health Sciences Environment University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill LSIS 5245: Health Sciences Resources and Services North Carolina Central University-Durham LIS 51 33: Biomedical Biblio & Reference University of Oklahoma-Norman LIS 51 63: Biomedical Databases University of Oklahoma-Norman LIS 2581 : Collections and Resources in Healthcare Envi- University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh ronments LIS 2585: Health Consumer Resources and Services University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh LIS 2586: Health Sciences Resources and Services University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh LIS 2587: Applications in Healthcare Informatics University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh LIS 2781 : Libraries in Healthcare Environments University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh LIS 2881 : Reference Service and Instruction in Health- University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh care Environments LIS 291 0: CAS Individual Research University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh LIS 2935: Field Experience Health Resources & Services University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh Specialization LIS 2970: Special Topics in Library in Library and Infor- University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh mation Science LIS 614: Health Sciences: Services and Sources Pratt Institute-New York LIS 624: Online Databases: Health Sciences Pratt Institute-New York LIS 685: Medical Librarianship Pratt Institute-New York LBSCI 784: Health Sciences Librarianship Queens College, City University of New York 523: Special Library Service University of Rhode Island-Kingston 537: Health Sciences Librarianship University of Rhode Island-Kingston 1 7:61 0:545: Information Resources in the Health Sciences Rutgers University-New Brunswick 1 7:610:542: Information Resources in Science and Rutgers University-New Brunswick Technology LIS 434: Medical Librarianship Simmons College-Boston (continued)
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 207 Appendix 1 (continued). Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University SLIS 727: Health Sciences Library Services University of South Carolina-Columbia SUS 743: Health Information Retrieval in Electronic University of South Carolina-Columbia Environments SUS 749: Health Sciences Information Resources University of South Carolina-Columbia SUS 758: Consumer Health Resources and Informa- University of South Carolina-Columbia tion Services US 6475: Health Sciences Librarianship University of South Florida-Tampa ILS 61 9: Medical Bibliography and Libraries Southern Connecticut State University-New Haven LIS 7800: Health Sciences Librarianship St. Catherine University-St. Paul LIS 7810: Reference Sources in Health Science St. Catherine University-St. Paul 256: Medical Information & Librarianship St. John's University-New York IST 609: Biomedical Information Services and Syracuse University-Syracuse Sources INF 382K: Information Resources in the Health Sci- University of Texas-Austin enees INF 383E: Interpreting Implicit Information on the Web University of Texas-Austin INF 385N: Informatics University of Texas-Austin INF 385V: Health Informatics University of Texas-Austin LS 5253: Electronic Information Resources in the Texas Woman's University-Denton Health Sciences LS 5363: Health Sciences Information Services Texas Woman's University-Denton LS 5473: Health Reference Information Sources and Texas Woman's University-Denton Services LS 5483: Consumer Health Information Resources Texas Woman's University-Denton LS 5463: Medical Specialties and Specialized Infor- Texas Woman's University-Denton mation Resources INF21 35H: Health Sciences Information Resources University of Toronto-Toronto INF21 83H: Knowledge Management and Systems University of Toronto-Toronto INF21 99H: Selected Topics in Health Informatics University of Toronto-Toronto MHI2001 H: Health Informatics I University of Toronto-Toronto MHI2002H: Health Informatics II University of Toronto-Toronto INF21 86H: Metadata Schemas and Applications University of Toronto-Toronto INF3001 H: Research in Information: Foundations University of Toronto-Toronto MLIS 71 1 1 : Info Retrieval in Sei, Tech, and Med Valdosta State University-Valdosta MLIS 71 70: Health Sciences Librarianship Valdosta State University-Valdosta LIS 528: Health Sciences Information Needs, Re- University of Washington-Seattle sources, and Environment LIS 761 0: Health Sciences Information Services and Wayne State University- Detroit Resources Lies 7620: Intro to Health Inform, and E-Science Wayne State University- Petro it (continued)
208 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Appendix 1 (continued). Titles of LIS Health-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University LIS 7650: Practicum: Health Science Wayne State University-Detroit LIS 931 9: Information Sources and Services in Science, Tech- University of Western Ontario-London nology and Medicine LIS 9320: Consumer Health Information Sources and Services University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9322: Evidence-Based Health Care for Info Pr. University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9501 : Human Resource Management University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9650: Management of Special Libraries and Information University of Western Ontario-London Services LIS 9350: An Introduction to Information Behaviour University of Western Ontario-London LIS 51 7: Consumer Health Info: Resources, Users University of Wisconsin-Madison LIS 61 7: Health Info Systems University of Wisconsin-Madison 835: Info Sources and Services in Health Sci University of Wisconsin-Madison Appendix 2. Titles of LIS Gender-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University LIBR 548F: History of the Book University of British Columbia-Vancouver LIBR 559B Topics In Computer-Based Information University of British Columbia-Vancouver Systems: New Media for Children and Young Adults LSC 636: Social Science Information Catholic University of America-Washington, DC LS 540 Multic Src & Serv Ed & Libr Clarion University of Pennsylvania-Clarion LIS 590X34 Female Historical Narratives University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS390RGI Race, Gender, and Info Tech University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS527 Literacy, Reading, and Readers University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590RGS Race Gender Sexuality in the Info Profes- University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign sions LIS590X14 Feminism, Librarianship, and Information University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590X1 6 Children's Literature Goes to the Movies University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590X45 Gender and Culture in Children's Picture University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign Books 021 :232 Race, Gender & Technology University of Iowa-Iowa City 021 :256 History of Readers and Reading University of Iowa-Iowa City 624 Media for Children and Young Adults University of Michigan-Ann Arbor LIS 2544 Social Sciences Resources and Services University of Pittsburgh-Pittsburgh 1 7:61 0:548 Materials for Young Adults Rutgers University-New Brunswick 1 7:610:571 Leadership in Theory and Practice Rutgers University-New Brunswick LIS 530J - Information Services for Diverse Users Simmons Col lege- Boston IS 575 Valuing Diversity: International and Intercul- University of Tennessee-Knoxville ^JuraMResourcesforYoutji^ (continued)
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 209 Appendix 2 (continued). Titles of LIS Gender-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University INF 304D - Introduction to Information Studies University of Texas-Austin INF 386G - Gender, Technology, and Information University of Texas-Austin INF2196H Special Topics in Information Studies: New Media University of Toronto-Toronto and Information Practices of the Young INF2331 H The Future of the Book University of Toronto-Toronto MSL1 300H Contemporary Theories of Art and Culture University of Toronto-Toronto INF21 98H Critical Histories of Information Technologies University of Toronto-Toronto INF2242H Studying Information and Knowledge Practices University of Toronto-Toronto LIS 9351 Library and Information Services for a Diverse Society University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9361 Children's Materials (Birth- 7 years): Evaluation and Use University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9380 Genres of Fiction, the Reader and the Public Library University of Western Ontario-London LIS 9381 Literary Appreciation University of Western Ontario-London Appendix 3. Titles of LIS Sexual Orientation-Related Courses in Canada and the United States. Course Title Name of University LIBR 531 : Client Centred Services for Adults University of British Columbia-Vancouver LIBR 563: Information Ethics and Intellectual Freedom University of British Columbia-Vancouver LIS590X30 GLBTIQ Resources and Services University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590X38 GLBTIQ Literature for Young Adults University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign LIS590RGS Race Gender Sexuality in the Info Profes- University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign sions LIS 530J Information Services for Diverse Users Simmons Col lege- Boston LIS 9351 Library and Information Services for a Diverse University of Western Ontario-London Society References Allison, M. M. (2007). Women's health: Librarian as social entrepreneur. Library Trends , 56(2), 423-448. Anasi, S. N. 1., & Nwalo, K. 1. N. (2012). In-school adolescent girls' reproductive health information needs and resources in public secondary schools in Lagos State, Nigeria. Pacific Northwest Li- brary Association Quarterly, 76(2), 19-28. Ankem, K. (2007). Information-seeking behavior of women in their path to an innovative alternate treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids. Jour- nal of the Medical Library Association, 95(2), 164-172. Apple, R. D. (2012). Seeking perfect motherhood: Women, medicine, and libraries. Library Trends, 60(3), 694-705. Baker, L. M., Case, P., & Policicchio, D. L. (2003). General health problems of inner-city sex work- ers: A pilot study. Journal of the Medical Library Association , 91( 1 ), 67-7 1 . Braa, J., Monteiro, E., & Sahay, S. (2004). Net- works of action: Sustainable health information systems across developing countries. MIS Quar- terly, 28(3), 337-368 Buckland, M. K. (1991). Information as thing. Jour- nal of the American Society for Information Sci- ence, 42(5), 351-360. Cobo, M. J., López-Herrera, Herrera- Viedma, E., & Herrera, F. (201 1). Science mapping software tools: Review, analysis, and cooperative study
21 0 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE among tools. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(1), 1382-1402. Davenport, T. H. & Prusak, L. (1997). Information ecology: Mastering the information and knowl- edge management environment. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Deevey, S. (2005). Endometriosis: Internet resourc- es. Medical Reference Services Quarterly, 24( 1), 67-76. Detlefsen, E. G., & Galvin, T. J. (1986). Education for health sciences biomedical librarianship: past, present and future. Bulletin of the Medical Li- brary Association, 74(2), 148-153. Detlefsen, E. G., & Huber , J. T. (1991). AIDS awareness in the LIS classroom and school. Jour- nal of Education for Library and Information Sci- ence, 32, 237-239. Fikar, C. R., & Keith, L. (2004). Information needs of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered health care professionals: Results of an Internet survey. Journal of the Medical Library Associa- tion, 92(1), 56-65. Genuis, S. K. (2012). Constructing 'sense' from evolving health information: A qualitative inves- tigation of information seeking and sense making across sources. Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 63(8), 1553-1566. Gross, M., Goldsmith, A., & Carruth, D. (2008). What do young adult novels say about HIV/ AIDS? A second look. Library Quarterly, 78(4): 397-418. Harris, R., Veinot, T., & Bella, L. (2010). A rela- tional perspective on HIV/AIDS information behaviour in rural Canada. Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services, 60(2), 129-141. Hasenjager, B. W. (1996). Managing the informa- tion ecology: A collaborative approach to infor- mation technology management. Westport, CN: Quorum Books. Huber, J. T., Peek, K. E., Hughes, L. A., & Little, F. (2003). Woman to woman: Community health in- formation project. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 9/(4), 404- 410. Hughes-Hassell, S., Overberg, E., & Harris, S. (2013). Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ)-themed literature for teens: Are school libraries providing adequate collections? School Library Research, 16, 1-18. Johnson, C. A. (2007). Library and information sci- ence education in developing countries. The In- ternational Information & Library Review, 59(2), 64-71. Kim, K. S.,& Sin, S. C. J. (2006). Recruiting and retaining students of color in LIS programs: Per- spectives of library and information profession- als. Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science, 47(2), 81-95. Klavans, R., and Boyack, K. W. (2009). Toward a consensus map of science. Journal of the Ameri- can Society for Information and Science Technol- ogy, 60(3), 455-476. Klavans, R., & Boyack, K. W. (201 1). Using global mapping to create more accurate document-level maps of research fields. Journal of the American Society for Information and Science Technology, 62(1), 1-18. Kuhlthau, C. C. (1994). Seeking meaning: A pro- cess approach to library and nformation servic- es. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Leu, D. J., Jr., Kinzer, C. K., Coiro, J. L., & Cam- mack, D. W. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies emerging from the Internet and other information and communication technologies. In R.B. Ruddell, & N.J. Unrau (Eds.), Theoreti- cal models and processes of reading (pp. 1 570- 1613). Newark, DE: International Reading As- sociation. Levine, A. (2002). Providing information on sexu- ality: Librarians can help youth become sexually healthy adults. Journal of Youth Services in Li- braries, 15(2), 45-48. López-Huertas, M. J., & Ramírez, I. D. T. (2007). Gender terminology and indexing systems: The case of woman's body, image and visualization. Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Infor- mation Services, 57(1), 34-44. Lugg, C. A. (2003). Sissies, faggots, lezzies, and dykes: Gender, sexual orientation, and a new politics of education? Educational Administra- tion Quarterly, 59(1), 95-134. Manzari, L., & Trinidad-Christensen, J. (2006). Us- er-centered design of a Web site for library and information science students: Heuristic evalua- tion and usability testing. Information Technol- ogy and Libraries, 25(3), 163-169. McKay, B. (2011). Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender health issues, disparities, and infor- mation resources. Medical Reference Services Quarterly, 30(4), 393^01. Mehra, B., & Dessell, A. (201 1). The role of library and information science education in the develop- ment of community health information services for people living with HIV/AIDS: Perspectives of directors and managers of public libraries. World Journal of AIDS, 1(3), 78-87. Mehra, B., & Braquet, D. (2011). Progressive LG- BTQ reference: Coming out in the 21st century. Reference Services Review, 59(3), 401-422. Merriam-Webster Dictionary (2004). (Revised ed.). Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster. Nardi, B. A., & O'Day, V. L. (1999). Information
LIS Courses for Intersections of Health-Gender and Health-Sexual Orientation Topics 211 ecologies: Using technology with heart. Cam- bridge, MA: The MIT Press. Nees, J. V. E., Waltman, L., Dekker, R., & Berg, J. V. D. (2010). A comparison of two techniques for bibliometric mapping: Multidimensional scal- ing and VOS. Journal of the American Society for Information and Science Technology, (57(12), 2405-2416. Odusanya, O. K., & Bankole, O. M. (2006). A sur- vey of information sources used by secondary school students in Ogun State, Nigeria for knowl- edge and attitudes towards HIV/AIDS. African Journal of Library, Archives & Information Sci- ence, 16( 1), 53-63. Peterson, M. W., & Fretz, P. C. (2003). Patient use of the Internet for information in a lung cancer clinic. CHEST Journal: Official Publication of the American College of Chest Physicians, 123(2), 452-457. Pierce, J. B. (2004). "Newly invited . . . into gov- ernment": Origins of federal government infor- mation on maternal and child health. Journal of Government Information, 30(5/6), 648-657. Pinho, F. A., & Guimarães, J. A. C. (2012). Male homosexuality in Brazilian indexing languages: Some ethical questions. Knowledge Organiza- tion, 59(5), 363-369. Reardon, B. A. (2001). Education for a culture of peace in a gender perspective. Paris, France: UNESCO. Rice, R. E. (2006). Influences, usage, and out- comes of Internet health information searching: Multivariate results from the Pew surveys. Inter- national Journal of Medical Informatics, 75(1), 8-28. Saleh, A. G., & Lasisi, F. I. (2011). Information needs and information seeking behavior of rural women in Borno State, Nigeria. Library Philoso- phy & Practice, 72-76. Saxena, S., Thornicroft, G., Knapp, M., & Whit- eford, H. (2007). Resources for mental health: Scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet, 370(9590), 878-889. Shabi, I. N. (2012). Knowledge and attitude of women to HIV/AIDS in a farming community in southwestern Nigeria: Challenges for public libraries. Public Library Quarterly, 31(3), 246- 255. Skelton, C. (2001). Schooling the boys: Masculini- ties and primary education. Florence, KY: Taylor & Francis, Inc. Skovira, R. J., & University, R. M. (2004). Using information landscape as a model to understand information use and design within organizations. Issues in Information Systems, 5(1), 308-324. van Eck, N. J., Waltman, L., Dekker, R., & Berg, J. V. D. (2010). A comparison of two techniques for bibliometric mapping: Multidimensional scal- ing and VOS. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 6/(12), 2405-2416. Warner, D., & Procaccino, J. D. (2004). Toward wellness: Women seeking health information. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 55(8), 709-730. Wathen, C. N., & McKeown, S. (2010). Can the government really help? Online information for women experiencing violence. Government In- formation Quarterly, 27(2), 170-176. Wilde, M. L., & Eppersonb, A. (2006). A survey of alumni of LIS distance education programs: Ex- periences and implications. The Journal of Aca- demic Librarians hip, 32(3), 238-250. Yoo, E.Y., & Robbins, L. S. (2008). Understanding middle-aged women's health information seek- ing on the web: A theoretical approach. Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 59(4), 577-590.