THE INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON BOOK CIRCULATION RALPH R. SHAW T NWO problems were considered in a study of use of shelv- ing made at the Gary Public Library: (i) Does tilting of the lower shelves effect any change in the distribu- tion of book selection over the seven shelves of a section? (2) Does tilting of lower shelves make it easier to find a particu- lar title? A series of tests extending more or less continuously over three months is reported herein as a contribution to the solution of these problems. To determine the effect of tilting of shelves on the distribu- tion of selection, several sections of shelving in the fiction-room were subjected to investigation. Conditions were varied, con- trols were set up, and so far as investigation in one library over a comparatively brief period can be taken as indicative of gen- eral conditions, rather interesting results or indications were obtained. The method of determining the source of books circulated that has been used heretofore might be termed the "circulation- count method." By this method a section of the collection is selected for test, such as the 8oo's, or fiction, or some other class, and each day the cards for books circulated in that class during the day are checked against the shelves to determine from which shelves the books may have been taken. This method was con- sidered too uncertain, because books taken from the stacks, from exhibit shelves, and special shelves-such as mystery stories, western stories, and the like-may incorrectly be cred- ited to circulation from the regular array of wall shelving. A method which might be termed the "shelf-count method" was developed. The sections selected for test were read before nine o'clock each morning and books were shifted so that there 480
INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON CIRCULATION 48I were exactly twenty books on each of the seven shelves of the section. No books were shelved in the test sections during the day, and a count of the books remaining on each shelf at six o'clock showed fairly exactly the number of books that had been removed. For evening tests (6:o0-9:oo P.M.) the same technique was used. This method gives exact results in theory, but we know that some books are removed from the shelf and are replaced almost immediately, while others are picked up from one shelf and re- placed on another. These shortcomings, of course, affect the circulation-count method in the same way that they do the shelf-count method, in that books replaced on shelves do not appear in the circulation records and cannot therefore contrib- ute to a correct count of actual use of the shelves. One way in which this shortcoming may be overcome would be to assign someone to watch and to record actual use of the shelves. The added work and cost involved might or might not be justified by the increased accuracy of the results obtained. However, the shelf-count method gives certain indications which should be valid in their comparative results even though the actual quantitative findings fall short of perfection. It has the added advantage that it may be carried out entirely with pages, as part of their regular work, without materially affecting the normal operation of the library. The tests were made in the central fiction-room. As a control, the shelves of one section were left straight, while the lower four shelves of the section adjoining were tilted. Then the following week the sections were reversed; the tilted section was returned to the horizontal position, the untilted one was tilted. Table i shows the findings for the series of day tests. The percentage of the total circulation for the section was computed for each shelf. Since perfectly equal distribution of selection over the seven shelves would mean that approximately 14 per cent of the books would come from each of the seven shelves, the deviation from the average is the difference between this theoretically perfect result and the actual percentage circulated from each shelf. The average deviation for the section is the sum of all the deviations
482 THE LIBRdRY QUIRTERLY divided by the number of shelves, being seven in the case con- sidered. The maximum deviation shows how far from the theo- retical distribution the most or least used shelf actually falls. All figures are converted to the nearest whole number, since it seems pointless to carry out these strictly comparative results to fractions. TABLE 1 DAY TEST: SHELVES OF ONE SECTION STRAIGHT, LOWER FouR SHELVES OF ADJOINING SECTION TILTED TILTED STRAIGHT Per Cent of Deviation . Per Cent of Deviation Shelf Number* Cim Average T| Total from Average Shelf Number C otal ~~(Per Cent) (e et I........ 22 17 3 I8 I4 0 2.1.... . 16 I2 2 29 23 9 3........... 22 17 3 I8 14 0 4.......... 22 I7 3 28 22 8 5... .. I4 II 3 i6 I3 I 6.1....... I7 I3 1 13 10 4 7.1.... . .7 13 I 5 4 10 Total ... I30 IOO i6 I27 IOO 32 Average deviation = 2 per cent Average deviation = 5 per cent Maximum deviation=3 per cent Maximum deviation= IO per cent * Shelves are numbered from top to bottom. From this it would appear that tilting the lower four shelves distributes use more evenly over the whole section. While tilt- ing the shelves did not show any great increase in the total cir- culation from the section, it did, nevertheless, radically change the distribution of this circulation. With no material change in the collection under observation, since the totals include tests of both sections in both the tilted and the untilted state, this radical change in the distribution indicates that book selection in the fiction collection is random rather than purposeful. It is to be noted from Table i that the maximum deviation from the aver- age was only 3 per cent with tilted shelves as compared with a
INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON CIRCULATION 483 deviation of IO per cent for the same shelves untilted, and the average deviation for all the shelves from the theoretically per- fect distribution is approximately halved by tilting the shelves. To check these findings further, the lower shelves of four other sections of shelving, which formed a single unit, were tilted and a shelf count kept for one week. The results of this test are shown in Table 2. TABLE 2 DAY TEST OF FouR SECTIONS, ALL WITH LOWER SHELVES TILTED Shetl Number Circulation Per Cent Deviation Shel Numer Crcultion of Total from Average I............. 15 12 2 2............. 18 14 0 3. ......... 26 20 6 4.. ... 17 13 I 5........ i6 13 I 6........ I9 15 I 7.17 13 1 Total ..... 128 100 12 Average deviation=2 per cent Maximum deviation= 6 per cent Thus the average deviation proved to be about the same as that found above for tilted shelves. While the maximum de- viation was larger than it was in the preceding experiment, it is still considerably smaller than that found for untilted shelves. Another factor that seems to enter into consideration is the location of the shelves. With all the lower shelves in these four sections tilted, the circulation was highest in the section nearest the entrance and lowest in the section farthest from the entrance. Starting with the section nearest the door, the circulations for the four sections were 34, 33, 33, and 28 volumes, respective- ly. Another two-week test showed that while a tilted section might circulate more books than the straight section when they were adjoining, the location of sections was more important
484 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY than straight or tilted shelves in determining total circulation. An untilted section at the entrance circulated 48 books during one week, while a tilted section I5 feet from the entrance cir- culated only 39. When these were reversed, the tilted section near the door circulated 5o books, while the new straight sec- tion iS feet farther into the room circulated only 35 volumes. This seems to indicate that tilting is an accessory factor rather than a determinant, and that location of the books plays a TABLE 3 NIGHT TEST WITH LOWER SHELVES TILTED UNDER LOW LIGHT INTENSITIES TILTED STRAIGHT Per Cent of Deviation Per Cent of Deviation Shelf Number Circulation Total from Average Circulation Total from Average (Per Cent) (Per Cent) I........... 4 8 6 9 24 10 2......... 4 8 6 I 3 II 3 .... II !23 9 8 2 I 7 4 ..14... 14 29 15 6 I6 2 5 ........... 7 I4 0 7 I8 4 6 .6 I2 2 7 18 4 7 ....... 3 6 8 0 0 14 Total ... 49 IOO 46 38 100 52 Average deviation =7 per cent Average deviation 7 per cent Maximum deviation= 15 per cent Maximum deviation= 14 per cent more important part than does tilting in determining total cir- culation. It also is a further indication that book selection by the public in the fiction-room depends chiefly upon what people happen to see; that random searching for a book occurs far more frequently than does searching for a particular author or a specific title. Since it appears that shelves are tilted chiefly to increase the ease with which titles on lower shelves may be read, it seemed advisable to make a shelf count under artificial illumination to determine whether tilting the lower shelves effected any change in distribution of book selection with relatively low light inten-
INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON CIRCULA4TION 485 sities. A two-week shelf count gave the results shown in Ta- ble 3. While this test shows more books circulated from the sections with tilted shelves than from the sections with untilted shelves, it also indicates that when the light intensity decreases tilting is definitely less important than lighting. In addition, however, it indicates that when the shelves were tilted the bottom shelf was used to a certain extent; whereas when the same shelves TABLE 4 LIGHT-METER TEST OF SHELVES DAY TEST NIGHT TEST Shelf Number Tilted Straight Tilted Straight Foot-Candles Foot-Candles I.......... 10 IO 3 3 2 .......... 12 I2 2 2 3............ I3 13 2 2 4 ......... 16 12 2+ 2 5.......... I8 10 2+ I- 6.......... 19 10 2+ l- 7............ I6 8 2+ 1 - were not tilted the bottom shelves were entirely unused in the evening over a two-week period. As seen in Table 3, the average deviation for tilted shelves is greater than it was found to be for untilted shelves under day- light conditions, and the evening distribution of selection, even with tilted shelves, is far from theoretical perfection; farther than the maximum deviation with straight shelves under day- light conditions. This brings us to our second problem, which is one of optics and physiological optics. A light-meter test of shelves under daylight and evening con- ditions, the results of which are given in Table 4, showed that not only does lighting affect the efficacy of tilting but that tilt-
486 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing of the lower shelves changes the intensity of effective illumi- nation. It is to be noted from the average readings in Table 4 that tilting the lower shelves doubled the amount of light reflected from the lower three shelves when artificial illumination was used, without any other change in the factors affecting the in- tensity of illumination. The evening tests are a better indi- cation of the effect of tilting than are the daylight tests, because the amount and direction of light available is more stable when artificial light is used. Daylight readings change so rapidly with every passing cloud and with the time of day that the relative readings for straight and tilted shelves may be used only as an indication that tilted shelves do reflect more light to the reader than do straight shelves, without taking the numerical relationships as final and applicable under all conditions. l _(Light source Light source CASE 1 CASE 2 STRAIGHT TILTED SHELVES SHELVES Book on Book on lower lower shelf shelf The increased reflection of light from tilted shelves is fully explicable by a rule of optics that the angle of incidence of light equals the angle of reflection. This is best illustrated by the simple diagram above. It is obvious that in Case i, with straight shelves, most of
INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON CIRCULdTION 487 the light that hits the book is reflected down toward the floor, and only a very small portion of it is reflected up toward the eyes of the reader. In Case 2, on the contrary, the great bulk of light is reflected directly to the eyes of the reader merely by changing the angle of incidence and thus the angle of reflection of the light. Thus the more nearly perpendicular to the line of vision the book is placed, the greater the amount of light reflected to the eye from the book. In addition, there is the fact that we have been trained to read material best that is normal or perpendicu- lar to the line of vision, and when an angle that the print makes with the line of vision becomes too great, it becomes impossible to read, regardless of the amount of illumination. This angle is probably in the neighborhood of 45 degrees, although this maxi- mum varies for different individuals. Thus the more nearly nor- mal to the line of vision the titles are placed, the more readily they can be read, and when the critical angle is exceeded, they cannot be read at all. This would indicate that a person standing before a section of straight shelving would not be able to read titles on the bot- tom shelves readily without stooping, regardless of the intensity of illumination. There are two ways by which the titles of books on the shelves may be made normal to the line of vision. In the method most generally used at the present time the books are shelved verti- cally and the borrower must shift his line of vision by bending, stooping, kneeling, or the like, so as to bring his eyes to a posi- tion at which the books on the shelf are approximately normal to the eye. The second method proposed is that of tilting the books so as to make their titles normal to the line of vision of a standing person. Then, since the amount of light reflected to the eye will be a maximum, according to the diagrams above, and since the angle of vision will be optimum, it should theoreti- cally be possible to read all the titles on the shelves without bending or stooping. This appeared to be the result with tilted shelves during the day, but failed to be justified by the results obtained during the evening. Another simple law of physics
488 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY explains this difference. The intensity of illumination varies as the square of the distance. Thus if a person stands erect with his eyes fourteen inches from shelf 2, the distance between his eyes and shelf 7 will be more than four times as much as that between his eyes and shelf 2, and more than sixteen times as much light will be required on shelf 7 for equal visibility. There are three ways to solve this problem. One is to develop a com- plex lighting system which will deliver the proper amount of light on each shelf; a second is to expect the reader to bend slightly to make the distance from his eyes to all shelves the same, and a third would be to design shelving in a curve so that the eyes of a person standing erect in front of the shelving would be approximately equidistant from each of the shelves. With either the second or the third method a lighting intensity of two foot-candles should suffice to make the titles readable with- out great strain. (This is, of course, subject to debate, and even the best authorities agree that intensity of illumination required under any conditions is chiefly a matter of conjecture and opin- ion.) It is to be noted that during daylight hours the light in- tensity was so high that it was possible, without bending, to read the titles on the lower shelves when they were tilted so that the books were normal to the eye; while during the evening hours the level of artificial illumination was not high enough to permit that. In the evening, even though the light intensity was high enough so that slight bending would have made the lower shelves clearly visible, they were not used. This seems to indicate that the third alternative, curved bookcases with tilted shelves, will be required if we are to ob- tain equalized use of all shelves under all conditions. However, another factor modifies this conclusion. Design of a section of shelving that would make all the shelves equidistant from the eye would require a curve extending about three feet out from the wall at the bottom of the section. The reader would then have to stand about three feet from shelf 2, and there would be no way for him to reach the upper four shelves. This raises another question: How far from the shelves does the average reader stand? While this distance is modified by
INFLUENCE OF SLOPING SHELVES ON CIRCULATION 489 the height of the borrower and the shelf that he or she is using, observation of a number of borrowers in the act of using the shelves indicated that they stand from about fourteen to twenty inches in front of the case, and that the determinant is reaching distance rather than seeing distance. That is, the borrower stands in such a position that he can readily reach books on the shelf on which his eyes rest. Thus, the optical theory developed indicates that if books are to be equidistant from the eyes of a standing person it would be necessary for the reader to stand back about three feet; but the practical factor of reach precludes such a design. Reaching distance affects the calculations in still another way. It is not possible for anyone to reach shelf 7 without bend- ing. If we are to use all seven shelves we must assume bending at the waist to reach shelves 6 and 7. Since this bending is in- evitable) because of the length of human arms and hands, we might as well assume that bending may be used to bring the eyes to within approximately the same distance of all the shelves. Because this is the case, tilting, in conjunction with the provision of evenly distributed light of as many foot-candles as we may be able to afford, will promote as even a distribution of selection over all the shelves as it is feasible to obtain. It must be borne in mind, however, that when the books are tilted their titles are moved back from the position they for- merly occupied relative to the shelf above, so that unless they are brought forward they cannot readily be seen. It is therefore necessary to compensate for tilt by moving the shelves forward somewhat to bring the titles to the approximate position they would have occupied if the books had not been tilted. This would require a stepped or curved construction of the lower half of the case. The maximum extension of the bottom of the case for this purpose would not exceed twelve or fourteen inches and thus would not interfere with normal standing and reaching distance in using any of the shelves. On the basis of the tests here recorded, some such design as this should represent about the optimum practical solution of this complex problem. Theo- retical perfection of distribution of selection under all conditions
490 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY should not be expected unless we are willing to forego the use of shelves 6 and 7, and even then it is unlikely that perfection would be attained. It must be pointed out, however, that during daylight hours, when there was more than enough light, very noticeable equali- zation of use was attained merely by tilting standard shelving and bringing shelf 7 forward four inches so that the titles were not hidden by shelf 6. These limited tests indicate that tilted shelves are very help- ful in making book titles more visible and in distributing selec- tion over all seven shelves. They raise questions as to how far a library may go in providing adequate display of books so that all books will be used, and they indicate that the chief problem is one of tilting in combination with properly designed illumina- tion. They raise some questions as to the importance of location of books as affecting casual book selection, and they indicate that casual selection predominates in the fiction-room. Other extensive tests should be made to determine the relative importance of a number of other factors, including the threshold of vision with respect to both intensity of illumination and angle of vision, effect of color of bindings, freshness of bindings, glare due to shellacked surfaces, effect of contrasts between color of lettering and color of books, size of type to be used for optimum results, and the like. If from twenty-five to fifty libraries would co-operate in gathering more data on these points over a three- month period, data would be provided from which generally valid conclusions might be drawn.