INFORMATION AS PROPERTY AND AS A PUBLIC GOOD: PERSPECTIVES FROM THE ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS' Roger A. McCain2 Some issues relating to property in information are reviewed in the light of recent work on the economic theory of property rights. According to this theory, costs of transaction are central to the evaluation of property rights and related public policy. Accordingly, special circumstances relative to transaction costs are considered in the cases of public libraries, photocopying, computer software, and satellite television feeds. Property rights are among the central institutions of a market economy. This being so, it is remarkable that until the latter half of this century, there was hardly anything that could be called an economic theory of property rights (but see [I]). Since 1960, however, a substantial literature has grown up on the economic theory of property rights, which typically relates property rights to the cost of transacting. This literature seems not to be well known outside the economics profession. The purpose of this paper is, first, to survey that theory in terms accessible to the noneconomist and, second, to apply it to four issues in the economics of information. The first section undertakes the survey. Its contents are expository rather than original and are offered here for the convenience of the noneconomist reader in understanding the analysis of the second section, which undertakes the applications. A brief final section sum- marizes and concludes. 1. I am indebted to Katherine W. McCain of Drexel University for comments on informa- tion and library science that have contributed significantly to the conception and content of this paper; to Barbara Wildemuth of the same institution for valuable comments on a preliminary draft; and to anonymous referees for valuable comments. Shortcomings of the paper are attributable to me. 2. Fordham University, Department of Economics, The Bronx, New York 10458. [Library Quarterly, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 265-2821 0 1988 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/88/5803-000 0 01 .00 265
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY An Overview of Some Recent Economic Thought on Property Rights One venerable "possible world" in economic theory is a world in which all economic activity is mediated through markets, that is, through property rights and the exchange of property rights. In such a world there is no economically relevant government activity. One can describe a possible world in which the outcome of these market processes is efficient and, indeed, defines an ideal of efficiency; and that particular possible world is an important touchstone of economic theory. In what follows I will refer to it as the world of ideal markets. Some economists, however, have argued that markets untrammeled by government intervention will not produce efficient results in the actual world. Since markets do not attain efficiency in the sense of the world of ideal markets, this is often called "market failure" [2], although that term is controversial in the literature under review. A historically important and illustrative case comes from environmental economics: the case of riparian rights, that is, rights to the preservation of a river. Suppose that a large number of people own real property along the bank of a river. If one person builds a dam or otherwise modifies the flow of the river in the section where he owns property, it will modify the nature of the property owned by some of the others, perhaps depriving them of benefits that they would otherwise have enjoyed. Has a property owner the right to build a dam, or has he the right to enjoy his riverbank with a river unmodified by the constructions of others on their property? If the property owner has the right to his riverbank un- modified by the constructions of others, then property rights are "ripar- ian"; otherwise they are not. Thus we have two possible systems of property rights, and in principle they might have different results. Suppose, in particular, that the exist- ing property rights system is nonriparian, so that river residents have the right to build dams, but building a dam is inefficient. We must be precise as to what we mean when we say that building the dam is inefficient. It means this: (1) if the dam is built, some people lose and others gain; and (2) those who lose lose more, in this specific sense: if the potential losers were to conspire and bribe the potential dam builder not to build the dam, they would be better off than they are if the dam is actually built. (They would be worse off by the amount of the bribe, but that is less than their loss if the dam is built.) This is the formal meaning of the econo- mist's locution that "the costs exceed the benefits of the dam."3 Here, "cost" is shorthand for "losses if the dam is built" and "benefits" is 3. This is referred to as the "compensation test" for efficiency. See [3-5]. The first two of these are reprinted in [6]; note the introductory discussion, pp. 385-86.
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 267 shorthand for "minimum necessary bribe." Whenever we evaluate an economic outcome as "efficient" ("inefficient"), we are saying that while some lose and others gain by it, the gainers gain more (less) th3n the losers lose. It follows that efficiency and distribution are separate issues, and evaluation on the basis of efficiency abstracts radically from all questions of distribution.4 In the world of ideal markets, "inefficient" outcomes (such as the building of the dam in this example) do not occur. Thus the building of the dam under nonriparian rights would be an instance of "market failure." Theorists of market failure would say that there are three possible responses of the public authority to this "market failure." First, it may be tolerated; but supposing that the inefficiency is not to be tolerated, second, the public authority might legislate a change of property rights, changing the legal system to one of riparian rights. (In that case, the dam presumably would not be built.) Third, if the inefficiency was not to be tolerated but the property rights for some reason could not be changed, then the public authority might resort to regulation, legislating a ban on dam building, requiring a license for dams to be built and requiring an "environmental impact statement," or placing a tax on dams. Thus the theory of market failure is sometimes put forward as an efficiency-based justification for government action in the actual world. Ronald Coase [7] and his followers criticize the concept of market failure and all that is supposed to follow from it.5 Their criticism is based on the economist's conception of efficiency. If indeed the potential losers can bribe the potential dam builder to desist, and they fail to do so, there must be some reason why they fail to do so. Perhaps the costs of organizing a conspiracy or committee, contacting potential losers, negotiating an agreement to share the costs of the bribe, and enforcing the agreement are large. These costs are "costs of transaction"-in this case the costs of the bribe transaction. If the potential losers fail to bribe the potential dam builder, then it must be because the costs of transac- 4. This assumption is, of course, questionable and has often been questioned in economic theory. Whenever any law or public policy is supported or opposed on efficiency grounds, however, this questionable abstraction is unavoidably accepted. In economics, discussion of these matters is called welfare economics. 5. There has been a large literature from this school. The following are some important or distinctive papers, with no claims made for comprehensiveness or any particular logic in the selection. Coase [8] seems to have introduced transaction costs into the literature of economic theory; Coase [7] founded the transaction cost theory of property rights. Demsetz [9-14] has been a major contributor to the literature and ideas of the school, as have Cheung [15] and Frech [16-18]. For surveys, note [19-2 1]. Note also [22, 231, and for a distinctive trend within the school that is relatively friendly to government intervention, note [24, 25].
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion in doing so are so great that the losers would actually be worse off, not better off, than they would be if the dam were built.6 But the costs of transaction were left out of account when the dam was declared inefficient, so that judgment of inefficiency is incomplete and must be reconsidered. This example illustrates that transaction costs are central to the mod- ern economics of property rights. The following propositions sum- marize much of the recent economic thinking on property rights. The second and third are due to Coase, and together they are sometimes referred to as the "Coase theorem":7 . one of the defining characteristics of the world of ideal markets is that it is a world without transaction costs; in a world without transaction costs, all systems of property rights are equally efficient, since market processes (exchanges of property rights) will lead to their reallocation if they are initially allocated "inefficiently"; in the actual world, systems of property rights differ from one another in the transaction costs that they imply, so that some systems of property rights may be preferable to others on total cost grounds, inclusive of transaction costs; proposals for the reform or regulation of property rights cannot be valid unless they take transaction costs fully into account. Much of the Coasian literature draws the "Panglossian Conclusion" [24, 25] that when transaction costs are fully taken into account, "what- ever is, is optimal"-that is, efficient. I have argued that this conclusion is incorrect [26, 27] and that many of the traditional arguments for government intervention in the market system (in economic theory) can be reinterpreted in transaction cost terms and are valid when this is done [26]. The ultimate issue may well be a philosophical one, relating to the meaningfulness of proposals for reform. Thus, the theory of property rights must be regarded as a part of the more general theory of transaction costs, and other aspects of the theory of transaction costs may illuminate issues in the economics of informa- tion. One instance is found in Burnham Beckwith's economic theory of free provision [28].8 Beckwith argued that it may be efficient to distrib- ute some goods or services free of charge and without rationing. It is true, of course, that when a good is distributed free, people will take 6. See, for example, [7, 9, 24, 25J. 7. The term "theorem," though often used, is not apposite, taken as it is from mathemat- ics. The Coasian literature is quite nonmathematical, and nothing to compare with mathematical proof of a result from clearly and formally stated assumptions is to be found in it. Perhaps the term "Coase doctrine" would be more apposite, provided that it is understood that the word "doctrine" carries no pejorative intent. 8. Note also Demsetz [9]. However, Demsetz speaks specifically of free provision by the private, profit-motivated sector. His example is supermarket parking spaces.
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 269 more of that good than would be taken in the world of ideal markets, in most cases, and in that sense, free distribution is "inefficient." But, again, this analysis is incomplete in that it overlooks the costs of transaction in distributing the goods al a price. There will be some costs (administrative costs and so forth) of excluding those who do not pay or who are not entitled to the good under a rationing scheme. Thus the costs of transac- tion saved by free distribution may more than outweigh the waste of resources due to overuse of the free good or service, making free distribution relatively efficient. This will be related to the free provision of information services discussed below. I hope that enough has been said to demonstrate that the analysis of transaction costs is both necessary and promising as a basis for a system- atic economics of property rights in information and of public policy with respect to information more generally. The applications in the next section will draw on the following maxims: 1. Because transaction costs exist in the actual world, some systems of prop- erty rights may be preferable to others on total cost grounds (Coase, see above); 2. It is relatively efficient to assign property rights to those who would ulti- mately obtain them in the world of ideal markets, rather than to those who would not, since it may be presumed that no transactions are then required and thus no transaction costs incurred (Wittman [29]); 3. It is efficient for the government to provide any service for which (a) the benefits exceed the costs, inclusive of all "transaction costs" of government provision, and (b) the government's "transaction costs" of so doing are less than the transaction costs that would be incurred in provision of the same service through private exchanges of property rights (McCain [26]); 4. Provision of a good or service without charge or rationing is efficient if the saving of costs of transaction in excluding nonpayers or others from the use of the service is greater than the "transaction costs" of providing the service free through a nonprofit agency, where those "transaction costs" include the waste of resources due to overuse of the free service (Beckwith [28]). Applications In this section, four specific applications of the transaction cost theory of property rights and free distribution in the economics of information are explored. The issues are photocopying, copy protection of computer software, encryption of satellite television feeds, and public libraries. These examples illustrate a more general point. It is rarely the case that arguments from property rights support only one side of an issue of policy. In the instance of riparian rights, there are property rights on both sides. This will be true of the four applications in the economics of information as well. Moreover, when we take transaction costs into account, considerations of efficiency may support either side, depending
270 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY on the relative magnitudes of the various costs. Thus it is generally incorrect to formulate issues as "economic values" versus "other values"; instead, there will be "economic values"-that is, property rights argu- ments and efficiency arguments-on both sides. Nevertheless, in each of the four cases, there is an "economic argument" on one side of the issue that is well known, while the economic arguments on the other side are not well known. I shall attempt to support the general point by articulat- ing the latter. Copying Technology, Transaction Costs, and Property in Information Recent progress in copying technology has sometimes been said to undermine property rights in information and has been the occasion of recent legislation intended to extend protection of those rights. Has this any basis in the economic theory of property rights? We may distinguish between the information and the medium in which it is embodied-that is, books, magnetic discs, electromagnetic waves, and so forth. It is by no means a given that the information will be the more valuable item. When books had to be copied by hand on parchment, the parchment may well have been the more valuable item, as the existence of medieval palimpsests-parchments reused at the cost of the information they had earlier embodied-suggests. The effect of improvements in copying technology is to reduce the cost of the me- dium. Thus, for example, with the invention of paper and printing, the value of information became a much larger proportion of the total value of the book, not because the information is more valuable but because the physical book itself is cheaper. This made the free enterprise of stealing the information by unauthorized reproduction a more plausible and profitable one. Before these developments, there was presumably no need for copyright law. It should be stressed that the case for copyright law is not a case for property against anarchy, but a case for one property right and against another. Copyright law deprives the proprietor of a printing press of the right to use it just as he sees fit. Thus, the parallel to the case of riparian versus nonriparian rights is precise. But the invention of the new copy- ing technology (printing) will have changed the balance of advantage as between the two systems of property rights and may well have done so in a definitive way. Free copying reduces the profitability of resources that produce information (in a world of positive transaction costs), and the loss of information that would otherwise be produced is a cost that must be charged against the property system with free copying. A legal system with copying limited by copyright imposes two kinds of cost. First, there are resources used up in the negotiation and enforcement of licenses to copy. Second, and probably more important, there is the wasteful
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 271 underuse of the copying technology that results from raisins the prices of copies (above the marginal cost) to cover the average overhead cost of the copyright fee. This dichotomy parallels one in the literature on the diffusion of information: longer patent periods will encourage the pro- duction of innovations but slow their diffusion. The parallel is precise: with copyright we have too little production of copies; but without copyright too little production of original works. But, when the cost of information (of the original work) is small by comparison with the cost of the copy (as it was before the invention of printing), the balance seems likely to favor free copying. When the cost of information is a larger proportion of the whole cost, the balance is less favorable to free copy- ing, and perhaps copyright law emerges as a result (compare 125]). But then what are the implications of the emergence of the still newer copying technology, photocopying? We should observe that photocopy- ing is not cheaper than printing, but the relation of variable costs and overhead costs is different.9 Photocopying is more expensive for long runs, but cheaper for very short runs. This implies that the copying activity is more dispersed and far more likely to be done for one's own use or for use by one's immediate associates than for sale for profit. The principal result is to raise the cost of enforcement of copyright laws and copyright licenses if copyright law is construed as prohibiting unau- thorized photocopying. These transaction costs could be quite large. They would include the costs of contacting the author or publisher, negotiating a contract, and processing the payment. Recent legislation establishing a national clear- inghouse for these purposes would reduce these costs and constitutes a recognition of their importance. They may still remain very high: the time required to write and post a check to the copyright center may well have a value several times that of the check [311. Moreover, the cost of enforcement of the law is also a real transaction cost of a system of property in information, and it seems quite likely that, if the law were really enforced, the resources necessary to do so would cost considerably more than the revenues that they would generate for the information producers. Finally, there is also the cost of wasteful underuse of copies. By raising the price of copying to cover the transaction cost of granting permission to do it, we further, inefficiently, restrict the number of copies, and this, too, is a cost that must be charged against the system of 9. Some of these points have recently been discussed in thejournal of Political Economy [30- 321. Novos and Waldman [30] argue that there is no wasteful underuse since (they say) copying is not cheaper than printing; but, as Liebowitz [321 points out, their comment is mistaken precisely in overlooking the flexibility of copying on a small scale. Note also Katz and Shapiro [33] on related issues with particular reference to video cassettes.
272 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY property rights in information. What is the cost of granting the privilege to copy a particular work already in print? I believe we may confidently put it at zero. Photocopying cannot affect the cost of information already in print for the reason that the present cannot affect the past. Of course, if the privilege to copy is made a part of the property rights of owners of copiers, it extends also to works that might be produced in the future and so may discourage the production of new books.'0 Thus, as usual, there are costs and benefits on both sides, but what is new in photocopying is precisely the possibility to benefit by flexible, small-scale copying and the high cost of enforcing its prohibition. Thus, just as the emergence of printing favored a legal system that protected the prop- erty rights of producers of information, so the emergence of photocopy technology seems to favor a property rights system that secures the proprietor of a copying machine in his property right to copy whatever he pleases. This is not to say that the latter legal system is clearly preferable but, rather, that the case for protection of property rights in information from photocopying is far less strong, when we consider transaction costs, than the case for protecting them from the printing press. Computer Software and Copy Protection Computer software, too, may be copied cheaply for short runs on a small scale and so is subject to many of the same issues that arise in the case of photocopying. Here again we have a choice between two incompossible property rights: the right of the buyer to copy as he may wish and the right of the originator to control copying. There are some important differences, however. One of these is the possibility of copy protection. It does not seem to be possible (within the state of the printer's art) to protect a book in print, technologically, from photocopying. "It is possi- ble to some degree to protect software from copying. Should we, then, affirm or deny the programmer's property right to produce and sell copy-protected programs? Should we regulate it? Copy protection is not perfect, of course, which introduces yet an- other complication not present in the issue of photocopying. Some kinds of software exist for the simple purpose of circumventing copy protec- tion. If programmers protect their software, the result may simply be that the users all buy software to circumvent that protection [34]. The 10. Johnson [31] stresses the trade-off between copying and production of original works. Liebowitz [32] questions that too, noting that free copying increases the productivity of the originals and so may increase, rather than decrease, the effective demand for them. 11. Liebowitz's comment [32J would apply here as well. See n. 10 above.
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 273 net result, then, is that both users and producers simply spend more resources than they would spend if there were no copy protection. In effect we have a copy-protection-and-zapping arms race. Now, arms races are inherently wasteful, and this might seem to be a powerful argument in favor of prohibiting copy protection. It seems hasty to draw any such conclusion, however. On the one hand, copy protection probably has some net effect. That is, it seems very unlikely that all users will buy zapping programs and copy at will. On the other hand, it is not clear whether a software industry is even sustainable in the long run in the absence of some protection against copying.'2 This seems to be a case in which the potential transaction costs and wastes attributable to both systems of property rights could be quite large.'3 Thus a case might be made for either system of property rights, depending on one's judgment of their relative magnitude. The case is instructive, nevertheless, in showing how, in some circumstances, the simple suppression of a property right may, by preventing arms-race- like behavior, make all parties concerned better off-even those whose rights are suppressed [36]. Satellite Television and Enctyption In the reception of satellite television feeds by the owners of private satellite dish antennas, we had, until recently, another case to parallel those of riparian rights, photocopying, and copying of software, a case in which the property rights of producers of satellite television feeds con- flict with the property rights of owners of satellite dish antennas. 12. It may be asked why the sustainability of the publishing industry was not at issue in the previous section, vis-a-vis photocopying. (I am indebted to Barbara Wildemuth for this point.) The main reason is empirical: publishing has coexisted with photocopying for two decades. However, commercial software is a new industry. Until a few years ago most software production took place under autarky-that is, software was produced by the user or was provided by the sellers of computing machines. (I have observed that when both public and private provision of an activity are subject to high transac- tion costs, then autarky may be optimal [26]). Online information services are also a new enough industry that we may wish to raise the sustainability issue, apropos of Garfield's comments paraphrased in de Gennaro [351; see n. 16 below. As noted there, the loss of a private sector may not (or may) be regrettable if there is a public activity to substitute for it. There is essentially no free public provision of software, however, and it is interesting that no one has proposed such a thing. 13. Free iSublic provision of computer software might well bejustifiable on transaction cost grounds, given the high costs assignable to both property systems in the case of software. A precedent and a model (for the provision of information largely used in a business context) may be found in the agricultural extension system. On that model, the research to develop new software packages would be done at public expense in public universities and disseminated to users through specialized institutions for the purpose.
274 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY There is one important difference, however. In this case, we may be able to resolve the issue by reference to the Wittman maxim. Wittman's maxim has not been called on before because it speaks only of the allocation of property rights to goods already in existence. Where the existence of the good is in question, Wittman's maxim is not clearly applicable. It would do no good (for example) to allocate the right to copy software to the users of the software if the long-run result would be that no commercial software would be available. In the case of the satellite television feeds, however, the case is somewhat different. These feeds are produced for another purpose (network and cable program- ming) and their production does not seem to be at issue. In the absence of transaction costs, in the ideal world of free markets, how would these rights ultimately be allocated? We may, I think, state that they would be allocated to the owners of satellite dish antennas because the marginal cost of doing so is zero, and the price that prevails in the ideal world of perfect markets is equal to the marginal cost. Thus, on Wittman's maxim, the property right to receive satellite broadcasts ought to be allocated to the owners of the satellite dish antennas. The recent development that has changed the case somewhat is the emergence of encryption of satellite feeds at the source. If the question is one of property rights, it may appear that there is only one property right at issue with respect to encryption: the putative property right of broadcasters to encrypt what they broadcast. We shall see that this is not correct, but suppose for now that it is. The right to encrypt has been granted by the public authority, on certain conditions, but perhaps it ought not have been granted. First, the cost of the decryption machines, which are reportedly being offered with the authorization of some of the companies that produce the feeds, is quite high [37, p. 25; 38]. This cost is a transaction cost that must be charged against the benefits (if any) from encryption. Second, since the marginal cost of reception of satellite television feeds is zero, any price above zero will result in wasteful underuse of the satellite dish antennas, which should also be charged against encryption in a complete assessment of its costs and benefits. Third, the benefits to the providers of satellite feeds from encryption seem likely to be very small indeed. The elasticity of demand for satellite television is not zero-which is the economist's way of saying that when the price goes up (from zero), some of the demanders will drop out of the market [39]. More will drop out when the very high costs of transaction are added to the price paid to the producers of the satellite television feeds. Thus the revenues generated will be less than proportional to the number of demanders now in the market, and they may be very much less, depending on the elasticity of demand. Fourth, it is an open question whether these revenues will
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 275 generate any gross benefits of comparable magnitude to viewers. The gross benefits to viewers would take the form of more and better satellite television programming produced with a view to capturing the custom of dish antenna owners. Given, however, that the feeds are produced for another purpose that would continue to be the predominant market, and given the economies of scale in production of television feeds, this expansion of programming could be quite small by comparison with the transaction costs against which it is to be charged. 14 Moreover, there is in fact a property rights argument on the other side. The law prohibits the use of decryption devices not authorized by the producers of the satellite feeds-that is, it suppresses the property rights of owners of decryption devices to use them freely. If it did not do so, then encryption would surely be nearly useless in the long run. Indeed, even with the law in place, it seems to be only a matter of time before illicit decryption technologies appear in the market,'5 and further expenditure will be required of the producers of satellite television feeds in order to prevent circumvention of their copy protection. Thus, again, as in the case of software copy protection, we have arms-race-like behav- ior. Public enforcement of the antidecryption regulation could be very costly, if not impossible, without infringement of the viewer's right to 14. Besen, Manning, and Mitchell [40] take up the issue and make reference to the Coasian reasoning. However, their quick dismissal of transaction costs (pp. 86-87) misses the point spectacularly. Though they wrote before satellite feeds were used, they argue for assigning property rights to broadcast stations, which would permit the stations to exclude cable systems from carrying their broadcasts. They support this with a numerical example. However, with a small change of numbers, their example supports the opposite argument-that is, that cable systems should have the right to carry whatever is broadcast-and this ambiguity of result is precisely the point of this paper. 15. These devices probably already exist [41]. Moreover, the present law may not be very effective in preventing unauthorized decryption. An inventor who has partially "cracked" an encryption scheme notes that it would be illegal to sell his "black box" for purposes of illicit decryption. He conjectures, however, that it would be legal under the present law if he were to "buy an hour a week of uplink time on a bird and [scramble] it.... Anyone who wanted to watch my hour of programming would have to use one of my sets. Of course, if it also happened to descramble HBO, Cinemax, and others at the same time, that's not my problem" [37, p. 22]. It would still be illegal for the viewer to use the receiver to decrypt feeds for HBO and other cable services without permission, but, for our purposes, the point is that the costs to the public authority of enforcing this prohibition would then be quite large. These costs are costs of transaction. Another apparent loophole is that some cable operators have been willing to sell premium services, such as HBO, to viewers outside their cable franchise areas. These are not supplied by cable feed, but the cable company supplies the decoder and retails the service to the viewer, who then obtains it by means of his satellite dish antenna. While HBO has refused to authorize service under these circumstances, there is evidently no technical means of preventing it [37, p. 25].
276 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY privacy, and this, too, is a transaction cost that must be charged against the right-to-encrypt system of property rights. I conclude that there is a case for the prohibition of encryption, or at least for permitting free decryption, and that the case may be very strong indeed when transaction costs and related costs are fully taken into account. Public Libraries and the Free Distribution of Information In the United States, there is a long tradition of the free provision of library services as a local public service. Several issues pertain to this. A matter of property in information will be taken first; the issue of how public subsidies to libraries may be justified in terms of efficiency, sec- ond; and the issue of free distribution of information per se will be considered third. With respect to property rights, it may be argued that free public libraries inherently infringe the rights of authors, publishers, and other producers of information since the organization of free lending ar- rangements may substitute for the sale of books or other information services. In so doing it may reduce the incentive to produce books or other information services, making the community worse off on net.16 Now, first, the argument would apply equally to private rental libraries and to clubs that are not subsidized by the public authority but are supported by dues paid by members who then have borrowing privi- leges. Thus, what we have here is another case parallel to that of riparian rights. Shall producers of books have the right to sell those books free of competition from rental or lending services, or shall people, and local communities, have the right to organize rental and lending services? Again, the answer depends on the specific numbers. To the extent (if any) that libraries discourage the sale and so the production of books, 16. That lending could reduce the supply of books is recognized in the debate surround- ing the proposed "public lending right"-that is, the right of authors to be compen- sated when their books are lent [27, 34, 42, 431. However, this debate also provides a good example of one-sided argument with respect to property rights as information. That there are property rights and cost-benefit arguments on the other side of the issue does not seem to have been noticed, even by the opponents of the proposal [43]. Another recognition of this cost is seen in Garfield's opposition to free public supply of information in competition with the private sector ([41], p. 365). As de Gennaro says, "No one disputes Garfield's right to sell information" [35, p. 365]. Yet it is not self- evident that this right is efficient. There are, as [28] and [26] note, transaction cost circumstances in which it is efficient to suppress a profitable private sector in order to concentrate activity in the public sector, as there are circumstances in which it is efficient to concentrate activity in the private sector. It depends on the numbers. Once again, one-sided argument dominates the discussion.
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 277 that would be a "transaction cost" of free provision, a form of wasteful overuse of the lending service, which would have to be taken into account in a full assessment of the efficiency of lending libraries. On the other hand, to the extent that the taste for books is a cultivated taste,17 it is not clear that free libraries will have the effect of reducing the retail demand for books on net. They may encourage cultivation of taste and so have the opposite effect, increasing the retail demand for books. (Compare, especially, [45, 46] with respect to the demand for artistic goods and services in general.) That would put the entire issue in rather a different light. But even excluding cultivation of taste for reading, a "public lending right" would be inefficient if the cost of enforcing it, a cost of transaction, were greater than the benefits to readers of the books that would not be produced without it. That seems quite possible. Why have public libraries at all? It is beyond the scope of this paper to review the economic literature on public libraries, which is in any case modest.'8 However, one point that emerges from that literature is that library services may be the object of an option demand [ 15]. This means that people may be willing to pay something to have a library available, even if they do not routinely use it. A particularly clear instance of option demand is the case of hospital services for emergency cardiac care; many of us might pay substantially to have these available, even if we hope never to use them. While library services do not provide an equally clear case, people may be willing to pay to have libraries available for themselves and their children, even in periods when they do not in fact use the libraries and would thus not be called on to pay an admission fee at the door if such fees were charged. Such a demand could, in principle, be served by a sort of club arrange- ment, in which only dues-paying members were permitted to use the library. Here again, though, costs of transaction would become crucial: the costs of contacting, informing, assessing dues, and so on could be 17. 1 have argued that cultivation of taste may justify government intervention [44-461, but my argument assumes a kind of predictably irrational behavior quite foreign to the transaction cost literature. Thus, to date, the argument from cultivation of taste has not been cast into the transaction costs mold. It ought to be, if only for consistency with the arguments in the balance of this paper. I offer a starting point ([47]; note also [48]) in the form of a game-theoretic "explanation" for the irrationality of [48]. The "explanation" is that people act shortsightedly because farsighted action can benefit them only if it is coordinated. An agreement to coordinate would be a transaction, and the costs of such a transaction could be quite high, so the failure of people to cultivate tastes efficiently (like other arguments for government intervention) is reducible to transaction costs-at least tentatively. 18. For examples, see [49-51].
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY quite high relative to the direct costs of providing library services. Some individuals may "play games," letting their dues lapse until such time as they choose to use the library and thus, in effect, getting the option for free. Deterring such behavior will have costs, and we conventionally include the costs of deterring, or coping with, strategic behavior among the transaction costs. If this line of reasoning is correct, then the transac- tional costs of supplying library services through the private sector would be high. If it were lower in the public sector, this would justify public provision of libraries. But these public libraries might well charge for some of their services. Indeed, probably almost all libraries do charge for some services, as, for example, for photocopying, but the price of most services is often placed at zero. Can there be an efficiency rationale for this practice, or must it be regarded as expressive of noneconomic values? In this connection, it is sometimes said that public libraries provide a public good. If so, that would justify the efficiency of free distribution, according to a well-known analysis of Samuelson [52]. But the descrip- tion is incorrect in terms of Samuelson's theory. A public good is not a good that happens to be provided by the public authority (in Samuel- son's discussion) but one for which public (free) provision is appropriate. Public provision is appropriate because the public good, by definition, has both of the following characteristics: it is nonexclusive and cost independent. To say that the good is nonexclusive is to say that (for some reason) it is infeasible to exclude from its benefits those who do not pay for them. Therefore, the good will not be provided'by the private sector, or it will not be adequately or ordinarily so provided. To say that the good is cost independent is to say that the cost of providing it does not depend on the number of units consumed, as, for example, the cost of putting on a television broadcast does not increase when one more person tunes in. Are public libraries public goods in this sense? It seems clear that they are not. It is quite feasible to exclude those who do not pay; rental libraries do exist. Moreover, while the cost of library service may be independent of use at low rates of use, it is most unlikely that it remains so at high rates of use [531. Public libraries have neither of the character- istics that define a Samuelsonian public good. I have argued [26] that Samuelson's analysis is a special case of the broader argument for free provision of some goods given by Beckwith. Can the public library be an instance of the Beckwith free good? To establish that this is so, we would have to establish that the mar- ginal cost of many library services is low by comparison with the transac- tion costs that would result if these services were offered on a fee for
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 279 service basis. There is little need to speculate about these costs.19 For the purposes of this paper, it is enough to notice that a judgment of the efficiency of free distribution of library services cannot be made in abstract but must depend on the numbers and could go either way. However, there may be a deeper issue here, and a point about which economists have something to learn. The visible transaction costs can assuredly be small. The cost of registering checkout and check in of books must be borne in any case, and the collection of a fee at this stage probably would entail little if any additional cost. Are there less visible transaction costs that arise from the peculiarities of information as a commodity? We simply do not know. For some arguments that informa- tion is indeed economically peculiar, note Arrow [551 and McCain [56]. This remains a controversial and unsettled area of economic theory. Here again, then, there is no confrontation between "economic values" and "other values." There is at least a possibility that free distri- bution of information may be efficient. But we do confront the limits of modern economic knowledge, and the question could be more clearly addressed if we knew more than we do about the economic nature of information. Summary and Conclusion Issues of efficient property rights and public policy cannot be under- stood without considering the costs of transaction that the property rights or policies occasion, and those transaction costs must be construed very broadly as including any unavoidable wastes that a particular sys- tem of transactions implies. When we do take transaction costs into account, issues having to do with property in information and informa- tion provision are clarified. In general, theory does not answer the questions of which system of property rights or which policy is best, because the answers depend on the relative magnitudes of the transac- tion costs on both sides. In some cases, however, plausible guesses about the magnitudes of the costs support tentative conclusions. Thus, though public libraries are clearly not public goods, there is a case for their public provision on transaction cost grounds. Similarly, the case for 19. It should be observed that technological progress can reduce the costs of exclusion. If so, then a good that would optimally have been supplied free by the public sector before the technical innovation might optimally be provided through the market afterward. It seems likely that directory assistance-formerly free but now generally provided at a price-is a case in point [541.
280 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY permitting and enforcing encryption of satellite feeds seems weak. Other cases may have to await examination of numerical data, some of them possibly very difficult to obtain. In the meanwhile, neither side of the dispute can be dismissed as "economically unsound." There will be costs and benefits on both sides of every issue, and, in general, the choice is not between property rights and something else but between alterna- tive rights of property. This is the most important and firm conclusion of the paper: there can often be sound economic reasoning on both sides of any dispute over property rights, and property rights in information are no exception. REFERENCES 1. Cross, M. L., and Ekelund, R. B., Jr. "A. T. Hadley: The American Invention of the Economics of Property Rights and Public Goods." Review of Social Economy 39 (April 1981): 37-50. 2. Bator, Francis. "The Anatomy of Market Failure." Quarterly Journal of Economics 72 (August 1958): 351-79. 3. Kaldor, Nicholas. "Welfare Propositions of Economics and Interpersonal Compari- sons of Utility." Economic Journal 49 (September 1939): 549-52. 4. Scitovsky, Tibor. "A Note on Welfare Propositions in Economics." Review of Economic Studies 9 (November 1941): 77-88. 5. Little, I. M. D. A Critique of Welfare Economics. 2d ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1957). 6. Arrow, K., and Scitovsky, Tibor. A.E.A. Readings in Welfare Economics. Homewood, Ill.: Irwin, 1969. 7. Coase, Ronald. "The Problem of Social Cost." Journal of Law and Economics 3 (1960): 1-44. 8. Coase, Ronald. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica 4 (1937): 386-405. 9. Demsetz, Harold. "The Exchange and Enforcement of Property Rights." Journal of Law and Economics 2 (October 1964): 11-21. 10. Demsetz, Harold. "Toward a Theory of Property Rights." Amenican Economnic Review 57 (May 1967): 347-59. 11. Demsetz, Harold. "The Cost of Transacting." Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (Febru- ary 1968): 33-53. 12. Demsetz, Harold. "Information and Efficiency: Another View." Journal of Law and Economics 12 (April 1969): 1-22. 13. Demsetz, Harold. "Barriers to Entry." American Economic Review 72 (March 1982): 47- 57. 14. Demsetz, Harold. "The Structure of Ownership and the Theory of the Firm."Journal of Law and Economics 26 (June 1983): 375-90. 15. Cheung, S. N. S. "The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-exclusive Resource." Journal of Law and Economics 13 (April 1970): 49-70. 16. Frech, H. E., 111. "Property Rights and the Dynamic Efficiency of Capitalism."Journal of Political Economy 83 (February 1975): 209. 17. Frech, H. E., III. "The Extended Coase Theorem and Long Run Equilibrium." Economic Inquiry 18 (April 1979): 254-68.
ECONOMIC THEORY OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 281 18. Frech, H. E., III, and Samprone, J. C., Jr. "The Welfare Loss of Excess Nonprice Competition." Journal of Law and Economics 23 (October 1980): 429-40. 19. Furubotn, Eirik, and Pejovich, S. "Property Rights and Economic Theory: A Survey of the Recent Literature." Journal of Economic Literature 10 (December 1972): 1137-62. 20. Furubotn, Eirik, and Pejovich, S. The Economics of Property Rights. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1974. 21. Alchian, Armen, and Demsetz, H. "The Property Rights Paradigm." Journal of Eco- nomic History 33 (March 1973): 16-27. 22. De Alessi, Louis. "Property Rights, Transaction Costs, and X-Efficiency: An Essay in Economic Theory." American Economic Review 73 (March 1983): 64-81. 23. Umbeck, John. "The California Gold Rush: A Study of Emerging Property Rights." Explorations in Economic History 14 (1977): 197-226. 24. Dahlmann, C. J. "The Problem of Externality."Joumal of Law and Economics 22 (1979): 14 1-62. 25. Toumanoff, P. G. "A Positive Analysis of the Theory of Market Failure." Kyklos 37 (1984): 529-41. 26. McCain, Roger A. "Transaction Costs and a Theory of Public Policy." Review of Social Economy 44 (December 1986): 238-50. 27. McCain, Roger A. "Transaction Costs Yes. Dr. Pangloss No: a Note." Fordham University, 1986. Typescript. 28. Beckwith, Burnham. The Economic Theory of a Socialist Economy. Stanford, Calif.: Stan- ford University Press, 1949. 29. Wittman, Donald. "Efficient Rules in Highway Safety and Sports Activity." Amrincan Economic Review 72 (March 1982): 78-90. 30. Novos, Ian E., and Waldman, Michael. "The Effects of Increased Copyright Protec- tion: An Analytic Approach." Journal of Political Economy 92 (April 1984): 236-46. 31. Johnson, W. R. "The Economics of Copying."Journal of Political Economy 93 (February 1985): 158-74. 32. Liebowitz, S. J. "Copying and Indirect Appropriability: Photocopying of Journals." Journal of Political Economy 93 (October 1985): 945-57. 33. Katz, M. L., and Shapiro, Carl. "Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network Externalities." Journal of Political Economy 94 (August 1986): 822-41. 34. Petreley, Nicholas. "Input/Output: Copy Protection Costs Software Makers Money." Trenton Times (June 30, 1986), B2. 35. de Gennaro, Richard. "Pay Libraries and User Charges." LibraryJournal 100 (February 15, 1975): 363-67. 36. Schelling, Thomas. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1959. 37. Wolenik, Bob. "You Can't Keep a Good Technology Down." Home Satellite TV 2 (July 1986): 20-25. 38. Sheldon, Dave. "Hooking Up the Videocypher II." Home Satellite TV 2 (July 1986): 72- 73. 39. Cooper, Bob. "Making the Hookup." Home Satellite TV 2 (July 1986): 26-31. 40. Besen, M.; Manning, W. G.; and Mitchell, B. M. "Copyright Liability for Cable Television: Compulsory Licensing and the Coase Theorem." journal of Law and Eco- nomics 21 (April 1978): 67-95. 41. Fennell, MichaelJ. "HBO Goes Consumer Direct." Home Satellite TV 2 (July 1986): 8. 42. Cooke, Eileen. "Public Lending Right." In 1984 Conferencefor Public Libraries, edited by A. F. Trezza, pp. 29-30. Tallahassee: Florida State University, School of Library and Information Studies, 1985. 43. Cole, John Y. "Public Lending Right: A Symposium at the Library of Congress." In
282 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1984 Conference for Public Libraries, edited by A. F. Trezza, pp. 31-36. Tallahassee: Florida State University, School of Library and Information Studies, 1985. 44. McCain, Roger A. "Reflections on the Cultivation of Taste."Journal of Cultural Econom- ics 3 (June 1979): 30-52. 45. McCain, Roger A. "Cultivation of Taste, Catastrophe Theory, and the Demand for Works of Art." American Economic Review 71 (May 1981): 332-34. 46. McCain, Roger A. "Optimal Subsidies to the Arts in a Shortsighted World."Journal of Cultural Economics 6 (June 1982): 15-32. 47. McCain, Roger A. "Game Theory and the Cultivation of Taste." Journal of Cultural Economics 10 (June 1986): 1-15. 48. Stevens, Dana. "The Social Efficiency of Arts Addiction." In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Cultural Economics and Planning. Vol. 2: Governments and Culture, edited by C. R. Waits, W. S. Hendon, and H. Horowitz, pp. 43-53. Akron, Ohio: Association for Cultural Economics and University of Akron, 1985. 49. Getz, Malcolm. Public Libraries: An Economic View. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer- sity Press, 1980. 50. White, L. J. The Public Library in the 1980s: The Problems of Choice. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1983. 51. Getz, Malcolm. Review of The Public Library in the 1980s: The Problem of Choice, by L. J. White. Journal of Economic Literature 22 (June 1984): 612-13. 52. Samuelson, Paul. "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditures." Review of Economics and Statistics 36 (November 1954): 387-89. 53. Fredland, J. E., and Tinari, F. D. "On the Erosion of Public Facilities." Review of Social Economy 36 (1978): 71-77. 54. Daly, G., and Mayor, T. "Estimating the Value of a Missing Market: The Economics of Directory Assistance." Journal of Law and Economics 23 (April 1980): 147-66. 55. Arrow, Kenneth. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention." In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, edited by R. R. Nelson. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press, 1962. 56. McCain, Roger A. "Tradition and Innovation: Some Economics of the Creative Arts, Science, Scholarship, and Technical Development." In Economics of Information, edited by M. Galatin and R. D. Leiter, pp. 173-204. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981.