THE SCHOLAR LOOKS AT INTER-LIBRARY CO-OPERATION' THEODORE C. BLEGEN T HE scholar is not an Emersonian abstraction. He is not a machine. Nor is he a gaunt and lonely folk- lore figure dwelling on an upper floor of a mythical tower of ivory. He is a human being selectively trained for his job and doing it in collaboration with others. As he probes into his special problems, he is informed by, and sensi- tive to, a thousand influences, past and present. Deny to him the fruits of thought and discovery and invention through past ages, and you turn him into a derelict. Cut him off from associ- ation with colleagues, whether speaking through their physical voices or through the pages of their recorded thought, and you rob his work of its vitality. Limit his freedom of access to, and use of, the materials, supplies, equipment, and background information for his re- search, and you cripple his efforts. He is instructed by the past and in- vited by the future, as Emerson says, but he is also aided or hindered by the present-aided if his working condi- tions are good, hindered if they are bad. Never the forlorn and isolated figure that legend has made him out to be, he is today more sharply aware than ever before of the importance of work- ing with others. This has been forced upon him by his own specialization, the interconnections of science, the tend- ency of problems to overlap conven- tional disciplines, and the importance of relating the part to the whole. For himself the scholar may paraphrase the English poet and preacher John Donne and say, "No scholar is an island, en- tire of itself. Every scholar is a piece of the universe, a part of the mainland of human search for truth in all its mani- fold interrelations." And so the American scholar today is joining research teams, tackling co- operative enterprises, building bridges to other disciplines, and exploring the interstitial areas. No emphasis upon, or trend toward, co-operation can ever lessen the need for original thinking and individual intellectual integrity; but the compulsions of human under- standing coupled with the nature of modern scholarship point to an ever greater reliance upon community effort in scholarship, with one skill buttress- ing another in the effort to solve prob- lems in the complex and interwoven human and natural universe. Thus scholarship, embracing the spirit and using the techniques of co-opera- tion, is leaguing itself with the future- to use the words of Ibsen-and this is a part of the setting of the dramatic inter- library venture that universities and li- braries of* the Middle West are here initiating. But only a part. For loom- ing up behind this enterprise and in- forming the mood of contemporary scholarship is a conviction that research is critical to our future, of vital urgen- cy, and in need of every support within our power. We know all too well that, with our land frontiers subdued, uncon- quered frontiers-scientific, social, eco- nomic, humane, educational-confront 1 A paper presented at the dedication ceremony of the Midwest Inter-Library Center on October 5, '95'. '3
IA THE LIBRARY OUARTERLY us. Research is unquestionably the pio- neering of the modern age. We know also that, in the dark shadow of two world wars and in the shade or sunlight of far-reaching new scientific discover- ies, this age is studded with problems as grave in their implications as they seem various and endless. Nearly everybody pays lip service to research. It stirs the imagination and provokes many figures of speech. Peo- ple call it professional lifeblood, the opening of new frontiers, the invasion of fields, the fighting of battles, the con- quest of visible and invisible enemies, a race against time. But all too many people think of research as magic-and, of course, magic needs nothing but a wand. Research is no magic, however- it employs no incantations, it has no bag of tricks. It is work, trained work, hard work, work done in freedom. And it imperatively needs facilities of many kinds, including books made accessible by all the means and devices of library science. Certainly, the universities and libraries co-operating in this enterprise are under no illusion that scholars pro- duce their results by waving wands. They understand that our most vital research need is for fundamental inves- tigation-something that Congress, in its failure to come quickly and gener- ously to the support of the National Science Foundation, shows that it does not understand. I cannot take part in this symposium without underlining another need of our time focused upon books and their use. This is the need to reinforce and extend the efforts of organized education to communicate the findings of research and reflection to a very wide public. An unused library is entombed elo- quence and wisdom. Scholarship that does not ultimately make impact in some form on the public mind is little more than antiquarianism. Research, as Edith Cavell said of patriotism, is not enough. Not long ago I participated in the Corning conference,2 the central idea of which was that our people almost desperately need to absorb and under- stand the largely unused or undistilled values in the humanities. We have rich treasures of mind and spirit that few share. Our shelves are crowded with books of importance whose message does not reach the people. Representa- tives of industry, business, and the aca- demic world met around conference tables at Corning to consider some of these humane values, most of them al- ready probed by a scholarship that, more often than not, wraps its thinking into bundles of jargon. The conference believed that these values should be un- wrapped and sent out into the life of America today. Who can say what the next step in the advance of civilization will be? It may be a new medicine, a new poem, a new symphony, a workable plan for peace. It could possibly be the translation of the best fruits of scholar- ship, notably in the humane areas, into the common understanding and posses- sion of millions. The task is one for scholarship, perhaps an essentially new kind of scholarship; and, when it is undertaken in full force, you may be sure that the books of inter-library centers, here and elsewhere in the re- gions of America, will be as pure gold to the miner. How does the scholar look at inter- library co-operation? Who can say? No 2 Conference on "Living in Industrial Civiliza- tion" held at Corning, N.Y., May 1I7-19, 1951. This conference was jointly sponsored by the Corning Glass Works and the American Council of Learned Societies as part of the centenary cele- bration of the Corning Glass Works.
THE SCHOLAR LOOKS AT INTER-LIBRARY CO-OPERATION one can speak for all the scholars of the Midwest or of America. They have no common voice, no chosen spokes- man, and I have some slight doubt that they would acknowledge a dean as their representative-particularly a graduate dean, who, as Howard Mumford Jones has said, is the "head of a school that does not exist and of a faculty that never meets," who "does nothing in particular but is subjected to heavy criticism unless he does it very well." As chairman of a university library committee, I have interested myself for a decade in the library as an integral part of the main-line educational pro- gram of a university. But I suspect that my chief claim-if any-for voicing the viewpoint of scholars is that I have shared some of their typical experi- ences. Et in Arcadia ego. I have hunted books and manuscripts. I have explored libraries and archives. I have taken notes to the ultimate, the arthritic, point. I have searched in vain for a book in my own library and then, after long reconnoitering, discovered a copy of it in the University of Illinois, not used by anyone for twenty-three years. I have scouted various European li- braries, employing their quaint medi- eval catalogs with silent prayer and a hope that intuition plus American luck would come to my rescue. So, after such experiences and with a choice collection of frustrations, I thank God for some genuine inter-library co-operation, even if the pool for immersion is some four hundred miles from my own campus. This inter-library center cannot fail to be of service to American scholar- ship. Research people, now undergoing intensive schooling in the arts of co- operation, should welcome a great cen- tral pool of materials for their own use, with riches pouring into it from fifteen or more co-operating institutions. They know that, with an enlarging Niagara of books and documents rushing out from the presses of the world, no uni- versity can buy or beg or harbor every- thing. If it did, and then processed it all, the outcome would be the channel- ing of the entire university budget to the library-the faculty uncomfortably left with tenure minus salary. There are-there must be-limitations upon library expansion. But these limitations apply to all our libraries. No university has an unlimited budget. Meanwhile, there is unnecessary duplication every- where. Everywhere there is needless competition. Everywhere there is un- planned expense in the struggle to meet special needs, often of a tempo- rary character. Everywhere there are research projects for which a given li- brary does not have the necessary materials at hand-materials which, though they may be duplicated in the little-used resources of another library, can be built up independently only at substantial expense and with painful delay. And it may well be that in some places research projects-at least at a certain level-now confine themselves mainly to materials immediately avail- able, whereas the use of the resources of a central collection, reasonably con- venient of access, might give them more flesh and blood. The scholar, looking at inter-library co-operation, will, I believe, hail this center as a desirable pool of research materials for the entire midwestern region. He will view it as a potential en- richment of the research resources for the region as a whole, available to him and to his students. Looking to a long future, he will see it as steadily growing in productive promise. But, trained to raise questions in his own research
i6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY province, he will pose certain questions about this enterprise. Will basic deci- sions on policy be attuned to the true needs of scholarship and education? How will books be selected? Along what lines will the collection be built? Will university administrations, mind- ful of the economies attendant upon a central pool, continue to treat univer- sity library budget problems with a sense of urgency and of fundamental educational and research need? What delays will be encountered in the use of some obscure item which, in the old days, might have been found, easily and quickly, on the university library shelves? Will there be any appreciable loss to research through the removal of books from customary shelves, where, in casual inspection, a scholar comes across material to which even the best guides might not afford recognizable clues? Scholars will ask these and other questions, not as objections but as cau- tions and perhaps as guides. If the proj- ect involves some loss or disadvantage, it will be more than offset by gain and advantage. My imagination is stirred when I think of fragmentary, incom- plete, little-used collections merging with related materials from other insti- tutions and being rounded out and en- riched. If the center continues to con- fine itself to little-used materials and to serving scholars efficiently through the participating libraries, most of the skep,- ticism-if, indeed, there is any-will be blown away. If there should occur a de- lay of a day or two in getting one's hand on a book that might have been found in a few minutes in one's own library, consider the offsetting advantages in quick, efficient, inter-library communi- cation for scores of items; in the crea- tion of new bibliographical tools; and in the increasing chance of finding not only the particular book wanted but also rare and important associated items, perhaps in some instances micro- filmed from unique copies. Are we not moving in the direction of an integrated system of library re- sources for the entire country, with the elimination of unneeded duplicates in regions like the Midwest, with the fill- ing-in of important areas now inade- quately collected, and with the develop- ment of bibliographical controls that surpass anything yet achieved? In appraising the Center, scholarship will give thought to yet other large issues for the future, for certain prob- lems of strategy cannot fail to be brought into the light of scrutiny by the lessons of successful inter-library co- operation. The truth is that unneeded duplication, confusion, and fragmen- tary service in the libraries reflect like conditions in the universities on the educational and research fronts. Co- operation in one segment of inter-uni- versity relationships invites considera- tion of its advantageous spread to other segments. For research and graduate education, this means asking ourselves some probing and possibly disturbing questions. What are the values and prospects of joint endeavor? Are uni- versities spreading themselves too thin? Do they offer to do more than they can actually do with high competence? What can individual institutions do very well and within the limits of their resources? Can they work out co-opera- tive agreements with other institutions? Such questions are not wholly theo- retical to me, for I have helped to pro- mote a modest arrangement with a neighboring university for co-operation in one field of study, with a division of
THE SCHOLAR LOOKS AT INTER-LIBRARY CO-OPERATION 17 specialization, flexible conditions for the intermigration of students, joint conferences, and an alternating of sum- mer sessions on two campuses' But uni- versities thus far have done relatively little to eliminate unrewarding duplica- tion and competition and to advance re- warding joint recognitions or alloca- tions of specialization. The problem is difficult, for no good university is static. Universities change. Their emphases do not remain the same, decade after dec- ade-and few would argue that they should. No co-operative plan, in re- search or in education, will succeed which does not take into account the viable character of university educa- tion, its dynamic quality as an ongoing institution, its flexible adjustment to changing objectives. But perhaps the difficulties are on- ly challenges to our resourcefulness. Meanwhile, this Center, notwithstand- ing obstacles that faced the idea a dec- ade ago, is a reality. Stephen Vincent Benet, in the opening line of Western Star, says "Americans are always mov- ing on." Today, in this dedication, we move on to new ground, new furrows, new crops. The job we tackle is one in which we-libraries, universities, schol- ars-work together toward a common harvest. As Mama says in I Remember Mama, "Is good."