THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 64 JULY 1994 Number 3 FOUNDING MOTHERS: THE CONTRIBUTION OF WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS TO PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED STATES1 Paula D. Watson2 The work of women's voluntary associations in support of free public libraries in the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is exam- ined in this article. This review addresses work at the local level by individual clubs, as well as activities of state federations and of the national coordinating body, the General Federation of Women's Clubs. Activities studied include wide- spread club support of traveling libraries, clubwomen's work for library legisla- tion, especially to establish state library extension agencies, and local efforts to found libraries. The cooperation of organized women's groups with the Ameri- can Library Association, state library associations, and state library commissions is explored as well as early support to library education. Findings are placed in the context of library historical writing to suggest that a substantial contribu- tion to American public library development has thus far received insufficient attention. Introduction After the Civil War, associations of women began to spring up all over the United States: in large cities, small towns, and even in frontier out- posts. These clubs had antecedents, as Anne Firor Scott has recently 1. This research was supported in part by a grant from the University of Illinois Research Board. I am grateful to Anne Firor Scott, W. K. Boyd Professor of History Emerita at Duke University, for encouraging this research in its initial stages and for providing helpful advice. Thanks are also due to Donald W. Krummel, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Wayne A. Wiegand, School of Library and Information Studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, for reading the manuscript and providing substantive comments. 2. University of Illinois Library, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1408 West Gregory Drive, Urbana, Illinois 61801. [Library Quarterly, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 233-2691 ? 1994 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/94/6403-0001$0 1.00 233
234 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY shown, in ladies' benevolent societies, Civil War soldiers' aid, church- related groups, and other organizations formed for the purpose of moral reform earlier in the nineteenth century [1]. The availability of factory-made household goods and low-cost domestic labor began to produce leisure time in the lives of women of the developing middle class that they used to pursue what was commonly called "self-culture." Women who already had higher educational attainments were inter- ested in continued learning and broadened intellectual horizons. Those with less formal schooling sought a means to educate themselves. To accomplish these ends, bands of women began to gather together all over the country to form study clubs and reading circles. These prolifer- ated, according to Scott, "as if some very contagious virus was loose in the female population" [1, p. 113]. While this widespread and unplanned phenomenon was taking place, a more systematic and intentional development was occurring in the East that eventually led to the formation of the General Federation of Women's Clubs (GFWC), a national organization that was to embrace a wide variety of political and social causes in the years to come.3 This federation would in time embrace many of the little clubs forming every- where nationwide and give focus and drive to their individual efforts. The history of the GFWC began with the formation by Jane C. Croly of a club in New York called Sorosis. Croly, a successful newspaper- woman, was moved to form Sorosis as a professional women's club when she was denied access to a lecture by the touring Charles Dickens at the Press Club of New York. Croly decided that it was time women had their own associations, and Sorosis was born. When, after twenty-one years, the club was about to celebrate the anniversary of its majority, Croly conceived the idea of inviting other prominent eastern women's clubs to join in commemorating the event. At this meeting in 1889 the assembled clubs agreed to form themselves into a federation. The Gen- eral Federation of Women's Clubs held its first biennial meeting in 1890. 3. Many of these causes are readily identifiable as "women's issues." The GFWC took an early interest in the betterment of public education from kindergarten to the university, also placing an emphasis on adult education and university extension. A focus on improving the lives of women and children addressed conditions of work for females and child workers, the study of home economics, and support of higher education for women. Related areas of interest included postal savings banks for small wage earners, civil service reform, uniform labor laws, and various aspects of public health. Branching out from this base, the GFWC interested itself in a whole range of environ- mental issues, including civic improvement, conservation and reclamation, and the protection of natural resource treasures such as the Palisades, the California redwoods, the Appalachian and White mountains, and the Everglades. Add to these concerns clean air and water, wildlife preservation, prison reform, Native American welfare, the Americanization of immigrants, and occupational health and safety issues, and the foregoing is still only a partial list of causes supported by the GFWC.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 235 By the third biennial in 1896, the federation was beginning to move from a focus on its own structure and procedures to an action agenda for improvements in society. Libraries were an early and prominent item on this agenda. Meanwhile, the same evolution from a focus on self-improvement to civic improvement was occurring at the local level. As Scott observed, the clubs "seemed to share some inner dynamic leading them to feel at some point that they had done enough for themselves and now owed something to the larger community" [1, p. 126]. Libraries were among the very earliest objects of club interest in community development. Clubs frequently collected libraries for their members' use in connection with their study and discussion activities, and members were imbued with the idea of the importance of books in improving the quality of life. Early on, they often shared their libraries with women in other clubs or with others in the community. Before long, they became interested in sharing books on a broader scale, sending libraries to remote areas where access to reading material of any kind, particularly for women and children, was severely limited. Individual clubs, and later, state fed- erations of clubs, organized traveling libraries for the benefit of those for whom books were an almost unknown luxury. At the same time that women were organizing traveling libraries, they often became interested in the establishment of libraries for use by the citizens in their own towns. In fact, a number of women's clubs were formed with this express purpose in mind. The period under consider- ation here, roughly 1870 to 1930, was a period of very rapid growth in the number of free public libraries in the United States. Women's clubs contributed in a very tangible way to the spread of the public library idea and to the foundation of numerous libraries in cities and towns across the country. Mrs. Charles A. Perkins, writing in June 1904 on library extension work in the Federation Bulletin (the official organ of the GFWC), asserted that clubs had established 474 free public librar- ies [2, p. 189]. In 1914, the executive secretary of the American Library Association, G. B. Utley, speaking at the federation biennial program on libraries stated that "fully one half the libraries in the country had been established through the influence of American women" [3, p. 561]. In 1933, Sophonisba Breckenridge, writing as a contributor to a presi- dential commission report on social trends in the United States, re- ported that the American Library Association then credited "women's clubs with the responsibility for initiating seventy-five percent of the public libraries now in existence in the United States" [4, p. 93].4 4. Breckinridge gives no specific source for ALA's report on the number of libraries formed by women. The figure has been quoted since without attribution or with Breck- inridge as the source. Utley's report of a figure consistent with the later Breckinridge statement implies that ALA was in fact keeping track, but the actual ALA record has
236 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY When clubwomen conceived the idea of founding a public library, they set about raising money. This they did in the way that women have always done and, to some extent, continue to do, through bake sales, entertainments, tag days, and other small-scale fund-raising events. Books were donated by members or other townspeople or purchased from funds earned by the club. Often they were cataloged by club mem- bers. Libraries might start housed in clubhouses or even in private homes, or in donated storefront space. In some towns, the clubs orga- nized stock companies, sold shares, identified sites, hired architects, and saw buildings built. They often continued to provide financial support to libraries once they were established or provided gifts of books or furniture. In addition to their personal philanthropy, which in some cases was substantial, women's clubs made the case in many communities for Carnegie gifts of library buildings. Library interests involved clubs in advocacy for various forms of legis- lation. In some states laws were needed to enable municipalities to pro- vide tax support to libraries. As a natural outgrowth of their interest in traveling libraries, clubs lobbied in favor of state support to library extension activities, especially through the formation of state library commissions. Clubwomen acted often as the first librarians in the libraries they established, and they recognized early on the importance of appropriate training. Sometimes they arranged this for themselves on a local basis, but more often their experiences convinced them of the need for a paid librarian and of the value of formal professional education for library workers. In many states, federated women played an advocacy role for library education. Similarly, in states such as Texas and Oklahoma, the state federations were the driving force behind the formation of state librarians' associations. Clubwomen were sometimes members, some took formal library training, and a few became professionals.5 Con- versely, many prominent library leaders of the time, such as Lutie Stearns, Clara Baldwin, and Gratia Countryman were also active club- women. Turn-of-the-century librarians were fulsome in their praise of the work of women's clubs. In 1904, for example, Phineas Windsor, then librarian at the University of Texas, wrote, "As in most of the thus far remained elusive. Although the founding body is listed in federal government statistical compilations of the period, it is not always possible to tell when a library association is listed as founder or whether the group was a women's or a men's group or a general association of townspeople. 5. Fannie Rawson, for example, chaired the Kentucky Federation's Traveling Library Committee. The federation worked hard for legislation to establish a state library commission, and Rawson became its secretary after completing work for a degree in library science.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 237 newer states, the movement in our own state for the establishment of libraries free to all the people is largely in the hands of club women, and the initial progress of this form of educational activity must be largely attributed to their zealous and persistent work" [5, p. 3]. The story of women's club contributions to the public library move- ment has many strands, and its chapters are found in multiple sources, published and unpublished. Published sources include city histories, li- brary histories, the histories and other published records of state federa- tions of women's clubs and the General Federation, histories of individ- ual clubs, library literature contemporary with the movement, and later reports. Unpublished sources include the archival records of individual clubs, the state federations and the GFWC, personal papers of promi- nent clubwomen, and related documents, such as the Carnegie library correspondence. Library historians have thus far provided only a minimal record of the substantial contribution of women's organizations to public library development, an omission to which Scott drew attention in 1985 [6]. The older standard texts include only brief mention of the role of women's groups. Sydney Ditzion in Arsenals of a Democratic Culture takes a paragraph to evaluate the thesis that clubs were a major factor in the spread of libraries particularly in the Midwest, and rejects the notion that their contribution was of any importance [7, p. 83]. In Carnegie Libraries, George Bobinski does not identify women's clubs as having any special place as the driving force for Carnegie grants in many com- munities. He spends a paragraph or two describing petitioners who might seem to have made themselves somewhat ridiculous in the argu- ments they chose to include in their applications to Carnegie, and he includes a few anecdotes about clubs in this context, at least calling attention to the fact that it was the women's club in many towns that undertook to contact Carnegie [8, p. 36]. A few studies of state library development highlight the role of women's clubs. In his review of Texas public library development, Donald Davis amply demonstrates the cen- tral role played by the Texas Federation of Women's Clubs [9]. Ray Held, in his history of the beginnings of public libraries in California, identifies some early ladies' libraries and marks a growing involvement of women's clubs that was to manifest itself in the years beyond the scope of his study in the last quarter of the nineteenth century [10]. Women's library work in California is also explored by Victoria Mus- mann [11]. Mary Anders's thesis on library development in the south- eastern states reviews the substantial contributions of women's clubs in this region beginning in the 1890s with an intense interest in support of traveling libraries [12]. David Taylor provides an account of a local club's founding and maintaining of a library in Arkansas [13], and in
238 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY a recent article, Joanne Passet mentions club support to traveling librar- ies [14]. No comprehensive, systematic documentation exists, however, of what appears to have been a massive, nationwide influence on the growth of one of our most important public institutions, especially out- side of the urban areas of the northeast. It is the purpose of this ar- ticle to provide an introduction to and overview of this significant and complex contribution of women to the social and intellectual fabric of American life. Spreading the Library Idea: Traveling Libraries and State Library Commissions Libraries very soon attracted the interest of women's clubs as they began to turn outward, organizing themselves to work for the public good. A morning session of the 1898 biennial meeting of the General Federation was entirely devoted to libraries. In the report of the proceedings of that session, the chair summarized the widespread efforts for libraries already underway: "A very large percentage of the clubs belonging to this Federation are actively engaged in library work: indeed, it seems to be common ground on which we all meet" [15, p. 481.6 As state federations began to be formed, library work was often given the highest priority. For example, the first business resolution of the Indiana Union of Literary Clubs in 1886 advanced the idea that the General Assembly commemorate the state centennial by "a liberal appropriation and a wise law authorizing the establishment and perpetual maintenance of Libraries accessible to the whole state" [16, p. 65].7 Similarly, in Texas, Mrs. J. C. Terrell proposed libraries as the initial work of the association and in 1898 rather audaciously issued a call for the state superintendent of education, the president of the state university, and "three other gentlemen" to form an advisory board to the federation's Library Com- mittee to aid their work in building public sentiment in favor of libraries [17, p. 108]. Quite independently and, in some cases, long before work for libraries became the focus of the state and national organizations, women all over the United States were forming groups for the express 6. Records in the GFWC archives of the programs of early biennials are sparse, making it necessary to rely on the published proceedings for information on activities and on the federation magazine of the time period. (The federation organ changed publishers and tides frequently during these years, especially before 1890.) 7. The resolution addressed the provision permitting towns to levy taxes only in support of libraries valued at at least one thousand dollars, which discouraged the formation of small libraries.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 239 purpose of founding free public libraries in their own communities. These efforts, some of which began immediately after the Civil War, are described in more detail in a later section of this article. At the same time that women were organizing to advocate for librar- ies, the states began to assume a responsibility for the growth of public libraries akin to the responsibility they had taken in the development of a system of free public education. Massachusetts was the first state to create an agency to foster the spread of libraries, with legislation in 1890 establishing the first state library commission. The commission idea took hold rapidly in the northeast. Several New England states established agencies within a few years, using the Massachusetts legisla- tion as a model. New York, too, created a body to oversee library devel- opment as a part of the University of the State of New York. Melvil Dewey, who was then State Librarian at Albany and director of the Home Education Department of the university, conceived a new means for spreading the knowledge of books and libraries, an idea that came to be integrated into the programs of library commissions in many other states. In 1893, Dewey established a system of traveling libraries: one- hundred-volume collections of popular books that could be sent out to areas of the state where citizens had no access to a library. Twenty-five taxpayers could request such a collection upon payment of a five-dollar fee for transportation and a guaranty of security for the books. Dewey, the originator of the early motto of the American Library Association, "The best reading, at the least cost for the greatest number," put his thinking into large-scale practice with the creation of the traveling li- brary system in New York state. During the first full year of its opera- tion, 11,900 volumes were sent out, and the idea of traveling libraries spread rapidly from state to state. In another of the parallel developments that seem to characterize this period of public library history, women's clubs in several states were maintaining traveling library systems on their own long before library commissions had been formed in their states or state associations of librarians had been organized or taken up the idea [14, p. 103; 18; 19, p. 5233]. In Delaware, for example, the general assembly was induced to provide an annual appropriation of one hundred dollars directly to the Delaware Federation of Women's Clubs to aid their traveling library work in 1899. By 1901, when a library commission was established, sev- eral traveling libraries had been assembled by the clubs with state sup- port in addition to the twenty-two that were created entirely from indi- vidual club resources. These fifteen hundred volumes were passed on by the federation to the commission upon its establishment [18, p. 75]. Similarly, in Maryland, women's clubs went into the traveling library business before the state did. The first traveling library in Maryland
240 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY consisted of books donated in 1900 by the Hytheham Club of Port De- posit. Subsequently, a federation committee was formed to draw up a bill to legalize traveling libraries and obtain a four-thousand-dollar appropriation for them. This bill, which also established a state library commission, was passed in 1902 [20, p. 52]. In Vermont, too, the state commission began its work by taking over the traveling libraries of the Vermont Federation. In 1901 Dewey assembled an overview of the origins and progress of the traveling library concept he had initiated eight years earlier, enti- tled Field and Future of Traveling Libraries [18]. A lengthy section on activities in thirty-four other states was included. The fact that some states are represented by only short paragraphs referring to Library Jour- nal or Public Libraries makes clear that the compiler was attempting to be quite comprehensive in the review and had supplemented information obtained in more direct ways with research in the contemporary litera- ture. In these summaries, the activities of women's clubs in support of traveling libraries are given a prominent place in state after state, usually a section of their own. Federations of women's clubs in a large number of states are given credit for obtaining passage of legislation supporting appropriations to traveling library programs or establishing library com- missions. Dewey's attention to women's club work for traveling libraries is representative of a growing recognition on the part of the infant library profession of the debt owed to the clubs by librarians and the general public alike. Women's clubs appeared to have an immediate and deep affinity for the idea of traveling libraries. As has been mentioned earlier, they often began by developing libraries to share with other clubs to support the wide-ranging topical study that was their earliest purpose. When system- atic support of traveling libraries in some states began, clubs were among the heaviest users of available services. Their lively appreciation for the role of books in their own lives, however, filled clubwomen with a desire to share the fruits of reading with others. Like the librarians of the period, they saw the traveling library as a natural adjunct of the public school and as a major force for general public education. They hoped that traveling libraries would awaken the desire for a free public library wherever there was none. More than this, they saw these hun- dred-volume collections as a means for improving the lives of ordinary people living in harsh and relatively deprived conditions.8 The traveling library work of Massachusetts clubwomen is representa- 8. In view of the formative role of clubwomen in relation to public libraries in many states, a study of what they read and what books they wished to put in the hands of others might yield important results for a clearer understanding of the public library as a cultural institution.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 241 tive of this missionary zeal. Library committee chairwomen in other states frequently cite Massachusetts as the ideal of library service they were striving to achieve. When other states were only beginning to pass library legislation and to establish large numbers of public libraries, Massachusetts could boast a free library in practically every one of its towns. Despite this happy situation, Massachusetts clubwomen still found ways to work for the spread of libraries. A report of the Educa- tion Committee of the Massachusetts Federation of Women's Clubs de- scribes an impulse in 1902 to reach beyond state borders: "Our hearts turned to the race of Anglo-Saxons in the Southern Mountains: a race of people eager for knowledge and books, but cut off by a formation of the country from many advantages" [21, p. 220]. The federation had already worked cooperatively with Georgia women to establish the Massachusetts Model School in Georgia and now asked its membership to supply books for traveling libraries to be sent to parts of the Carolinas, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Georgia. Word of this activity spread to women in other states and appeals came also from Oklahoma, Florida, and the Dakotas. Massachusetts clubs responded with thousands of books, and these were sent to be distributed in a systematic way by clubwomen in the recipient states.9 With these books went also "the cordial good fellowship, the sympathy, and friendship of every Massa- chusetts woman to her far-away kinswoman in many another state" [21, p. 220; 22]. Even in New York, where the modern traveling library had its origin and where the system had substantial state support from the outset, clubwomen still played an important role. Dewey reported that a federa- tion committee was appointed to work closely with the state library. The plan of work of this committee was to be duplicated by state library committees of federated clubs and in localities all over the country. The committee undertook to work for the establishment of free libraries where none existed, to encourage small libraries already in existence, to convert subscription libraries to free libraries, to promote traveling libraries, to raise the standard of school library books, and to cooperate with the state library in preparing reading lists. To accomplish these goals, the committee proposed to form a network of workers, each as- signed to a specific district of the state. Each worker could choose what she believed to be the most effective method to promote library inter- ests, spreading the word through correspondence, newspaper articles, or by visits to localities. All would be responsible to organize meetings within their districts, inviting librarians, especially those from small li- 9. May Alden Ward mentions the sending of "over twelve thousand books to various places in the West and the South" [21, p. 220].
242 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY braries, and all members of the public interested in books and reading. In practice these meetings would be "ia section meeting of the New York library association, except that the subjects under discussion shall be popular rather than technical" [18, pp. 10-13]. Activities such as those outlined in this federation work plan as tasks for clubwomen later be- came the assigned responsibilities of librarians hired by state library commissions as "organizers." In some of the midwestern states, where state support of library ex- tension activities took longer to establish, clubwomen maintained exten- sive traveling library circuits supported for years entirely from their own resources of time, energy, and practical benevolence. In Illinois, clubwomen maintained three hundred traveling libraries from 1898 to 1905 that were turned over to the state once legislation for a library commission was finally passed. Mrs. Charles A. Perkins, in the article cited above, reported that thirty-four states with federations belonging to the GFWC had among them 4,655 traveling libraries with a total of 340,961 volumes and that, in 1904, clubs still controlled 1,016 of these with 46,208 volumes [2]. The earliest states to establish library commissions after Massachu- setts included New Hampshire, Connecticut, Vermont, and Wisconsin. Women's clubs were already supporting traveling libraries in all these states. Women were also playing an active role in library work in Ohio and Georgia, the next two states to create commissions. In many states where commissions were founded subsequently, the state federation played a primary role in securing the relevant legislation. Federations also worked for appropriations in support of traveling library and other commission programs. Mrs. Perkins noted that club work had procured $88,300 in state appropriations for traveling libraries [2, p. 188]. In Indiana, the idea of a state library commission was suggested and pro- moted by Merica Hoagland, who was president of the Indiana Union of Literary Clubs in 1897. After visits to libraries and attendance at library association meetings to gain an understanding of the need, a federation committee drafted legislation. Clubwomen lobbied hard for the bill, writing letters to their assemblymen and the newspapers, ob- taining candidates' pledges of support in election campaigns, and testi- fying at hearings on the bill, which passed in 1899 [23]. Indiana women's efforts to secure legislation in support of library commissions and related library extension efforts were duplicated in many other states during the first decade of the century. Perhaps the most charmingly recounted history of a female campaign for a state library commission, and the most generally illuminating, is the story of the two hundred women of the Columbian Club of Boise, Idaho. The account is provided in a talk by Mrs. E. J. Dockery to a roundtable
FOUNDING MOTHERS 243 meeting of the American Library Association in 1901 published in Li- brary Journal [24]. Aside from some verbal excesses in regard to the generally uplifting role of women in society, Mrs. Dockery speaks clearly and modestly, but not without a certain coyness, especially in relation to the "stronger" sex. The program she describes to mobilize support for library legislation, however, had impact, comprehensiveness, and sophistication worthy of a modern-day political action committee cam- paign. The women of the Columbian Club experienced an evolution in the development of their thinking about libraries that was typical for a women's club of the time. They began by accumulating sufficient re- sources to inaugurate a system of fifteen traveling libraries totaling eight hundred volumes. They promoted their work in the press and stressed the importance of traveling libraries to Idaho teachers at their state association meeting. As it became more difficult to satisfy the demand they themselves had created, they began to think in terms of lobbying for state support to library extension. They targeted each of the seventy- five newspapers in Idaho with press releases and formed an effective alliance with educators, trading their support of a bill supporting school libraries for teacher support of public library legislation. They cam- paigned for candidates who declared themselves on the right side, iden- tified a highly visible sponsor for their two bills, testified before the relevant legislative committees, and buttonholed every legislator but one before the bill came to the floor. On the day for final action in the legislature, the two hundred clubwomen appeared en masse. Mrs. Dock- ery describes how the senators had a little joke at the expense of the ladies indicative of their rather paternalistic attitude: "Imagine our con- sternation, when the question was submitted to an aye or nay vote, at not a voice being raised in its favor save Senator Donnelly's [the bill's sponsor]. For a few moments silence so profound it was almost palpable prevailed, when presently Senator Kincaid, who was in the chair, with- out calling for the nays, solemnly announced, 'The ayes have it'; and delight supplanted our agonized distress as the pleasantry at Senator Donnelly's expense and ours dawned upon us" [24, p. 190]. In passing the bill, the senators wished it "expressly understood that they did so because intimidated by the presence of the Columbian Club." In the lower house only the member who had not been buttonholed by a clubwoman voted against the measure. He too played the tease, saying his protest vote was the result of being neglected. It was clearly a gallant occasion and "the best of spirits prevailed." Deference to the ladies was maintained when the bill was put before the governor for signature "elaborately prepared and adorned with the club colors by attaches of the legislature" [24, p. 190].
244 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY For all the levity and amused paternal benevolence on the part of the legislators, it is obvious that the women of Boise got what they wanted and in a most effective way. The commission law as passed specified that at least two of the five members be women. The first Idaho commission had in fact four female appointees, all of whom were clubwomen, with two from Boise. Mrs. Dockery was well aware of the role played by Idaho women's access to the ballot, "the most powerful and bloodless offensive and defensive weapon on earth" [24, p. 190]. The well-orchestrated and concerted campaign mounted by the Colum- bian Club in favor of a cause in which they believed represents a chang- ing sense of themselves experienced by women of this era. The ladies of Boise still knew their place, but were finding their voice and begin- ning to feel their power.'l There is little doubt that the state federations of women's clubs can claim credit for the passage of legislation in many states to establish library commissions, although in some states it took longer for success to crown their efforts than in others (fourteen years in Illinois, for exam- ple). Where commissions were slow in coming, the state federations frequently took on the functions typically performed by these agencies. In 1907 in Kentucky, for example, the first work of the newly formed Committee on Library Extension was to perform a survey of library conditions statewide (in its second year of existence the Maine State Library Commission did exactly the same thing). The Kentucky Federa- 10. This demonstration of the organizational capabilities and political acumen of women's club members is very different from the portrait of diffidence and timidity presented by Ring in a recent analysis of the failure of Carnegie initiatives in seven midwestern towns [25]. The sweeping indictment implied by the title of his piece is completely unsupported by the evidence he presents and is dangerously misleading. Ring's char- acterization of women's club "culture" is based entirely on a fictional source, Helen Santmyer's novel ... And Ladies of the Club. His argument assigning Carnegie failures to the defects of club culture rests primarily on events in three towns: Burr Oak and Grand Ledge, Michigan, and Chardon, Ohio. In Burr Oak, he accuses the women of alienating the public by their smug and condescending attitude in claiming credit for the work they did for a municipal library, but he is not really able to show why the tax levy for a Carnegie library failed. Ring appears to tax the women of Grand Ledge with sins of omission rather than commission, implying that, since they were able to mount a successful campaign in 1921 after the Carnegie offer had been with- drawn, they should have been able to do so earlier. In Chardon, no one assumed a leadership role, various actors worked at cross-purposes, confusion arose over archi- tect's plans, disputes developed over the site, and, basically, the City Council was unable to meet Carnegie's standard financial requirements. Chardon presents a typical example of a town that could not get itself organized behind the idea of a Carnegie library. For reasons that remain obscure, however, Ring holds the women's club ulti- mately responsible for its failure. Even in this, his best example, the tie Ring posits between a women's club "culture" short on political sophistication and long on moral superiority is appallingly tenuous.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 245 tion also established a fund in that same year to pay for a librarian to supervise its traveling libraries program, again much as a state library commission would do [26, p. 268]. Georgia was among the earliest states to pass legislation establishing a library commission in 1897, but no funds were actually appropriated to support the work of the agency until 1918. Georgia clubwomen, like their counterparts in other states, rushed in to fill the void. They orga- nized a system of traveling libraries both to support club study and to meet the needs of the ordinary citizens in remote areas. Mrs. J. K. Ottley of Atlanta is quoted by Dewey on traveling library work in Georgia as follows: "Each club secures by every means possible, all the books and magazines it can and distributes them by hand, as loan libraries in re- mote districts through its own country. This saves carriage and gives the women of each club a personal interest which they could not feel if all the work emanated from one central head" [18, pp. 79-80]. Mrs. Ottley goes on to describe the somewhat unique approach to library organizing practiced by Georgia women. Their plan was to target com- munities where there were rural schools as future homes for public libraries. Clubwomen from Atlanta, for instance, worked to establish "neighborhood library associations" in each of the fifty-six towns with schools in Fulton County. These associations were planned to include both men and women potentially interested in founding a library. Once the group was established, the women's clubs lent a small book collection to the association as an incentive to work toward establishing a town library. Cooperation of teachers and state and county education officials was easily obtained. Federations that had worked for the foundation of state commissions felt a continuing responsibility to support their work and, in turn, the commissions often looked upon the federations as their strongest allies, whether or not they owed their existence to women's work. Even after fourteen years of unceasing labor to obtain a library commission in Illinois, clubwomen did not rest for a moment upon their laurels: "The State Federation of Clubs is responsible for the establishment of the Library Commission and it should do everything in its power to promote the commissions [sic] interest through cooperation at every point" [27, p. 45]. In 1905 in Indiana, the federation pledged to assist the state commission six years after its founding in organizing public libraries in the 375 towns and cities where none yet existed [28]. The library commissioners of Maine readily acknowledged that the agency owed its existence to the state federation and turned immediately to women's clubs for help in its initial work of founding an effective system of traveling libraries. The commission deemed it a "privilege" to be able to consult with a "prominent officer" of the federation in the matter
246 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of selecting books for inclusion in the libraries and issued a call to the clubs to defray the five-dollar fee for placing libraries in the towns most needing them but least able to afford them. "It is to the club women of Maine that the commission most confidently looks for assistance. Through them it hopes to come into touch with communities that are ready for the traveling library. It is relying on them to create interest in the traveling library in places where at present there is no interest" [29, p. 5]. The response was general and generous, and the commission was clearly grateful: "For whatever success has been achieved, for what- ever good has been done, for whatever more may result from the seed now sown, full credit must be given to the women of the State" [29, pp. 5-6]. Although Wisconsin clubwomen were quite active in library work, the state library commission did not owe its existence to their efforts but, rather, to those of F. A. Hutchins, who became commissioner, and Sena- tor J. H. Stout, who had himself set up a circuit of traveling libraries in his own county and given personal financial support to summer schools for librarians in Madison. Nevertheless, Hutchins, who was gen- erally regarded as one of the most able of state library commissioners, maintained the most cordial relations with women's clubs. For example, Mrs. Dockery of Boise (formerly of Wisconsin) in the speech described above thanks Hutchins for providing advice and literature for the Idaho campaign. Hutchins's attitude toward the value of club work is typified by a speech to the annual meeting of the Wisconsin State Federation of Women's Clubs in Madison in 1901. His purpose was to lay out proj- ects in library extension for the federation to pursue jointly with the commission. He urges support of three programs upon the assembly: improvement of home libraries, increasing training opportunities for librarians, and extending library services to the farm population. In connection with the latter two, he asks the federation to appoint commit- tees to study the issues formally and report their findings so as to arouse public opinion in favor of legislative action. In a parting shot, he re- minds clubwomen that five hundred more traveling libraries are needed and clearly implies that he is depending on them for a substantial fund- raising effort [30, p. 8]. Lutie Stearns, chair of the General Federation Library Extension Committee, chief of the Traveling Library Department of the Wisconsin State Library Commission, and an early library leader, summarized the progress of library commission work and cooperative relations between clubs and commissions in her report to the eleventh GFWC biennial conference in 1912. She observed that fifteen states did not yet have library commissions and eight did not yet have library associations, sug- gesting that the "best work" for clubs in these states was to remedy these
FOUNDING MOTHERS 247 deficiencies. In states where there were commissions, she urged clubs to "do everything in their power to promote commission interests through cooperation at every point," actively working for increased appropria- tions, for "wise" library laws, for the general extension of library privi- leges, for proper training for librarians, and for the placement on li- brary shelves of reading matter that will inspire, inform, or refresh. She also suggested that clubwomen should agitate for library work with children in their communities, for the establishment of social centers in library buildings, and for university extension and other forms of public education. More specifically, she recommended that women work toward a library "ideal" to rest on a free county library in every county seat, public libraries in individual towns able to afford them, a county system of traveling libraries, book wagons to distribute books from house to house, the use of rural free delivery to send individual books to individual borrowers, the use of parcel post to send traveling libraries to remote areas, and the use of rural telephone between home, school, and library for reference purposes. "After all this is accomplished by club women, what the next step will be I do not know, unless it is to hire readers to read books to people who are too tired or too lazy to read them for themselves!" [31, pp. 377-379]. It seems clear that women were completely at ease with the ambitious goals Stearns set out for them and quite willing to accept the work involved. Evidently, they viewed themselves as stakeholders in the expansion of library services. The attitude in Colorado is indicative. When the traveling libraries supported as the first work of the state federation were institutionalized in a state Department for Library Ex- tension, the bill creating this department and appropriating funds was described in the Colorado Federation Yearbook as "the first bill for women" involving an appropriation to be passed by the state [32, p. 61]. In their work for library commissions, women claimed, in current usage, "ownership" of the library extension "problem." They wanted to be part of the solution and, in the legislation they drafted or encour- aged in several states, they saw to it that slots as commissioners were designated for women in general and clubwomen in particular. This occurred in Idaho, as we have seen, and also in Indiana, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Iowa, Kentucky, Washington, Colorado, Tennessee, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. In Kentucky, one of five commissioners was to be selected from among nominees of the state federation. In Indiana, the idea for a state library commission was suggested and promoted by Hoagland, president of the Indiana Union of Literary Clubs, who was herself a librarian and became secretary of the commission. In Kansas, members of the first Traveling Libraries Commission were past presi-
248 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY dents of the Social Science Federation who had worked for the legisla- tion, and the current president was designated as an ex officio member. On the Washington commission, one appointee was required to repre- sent women's clubs and a second, to be chosen by the governor, was required to be a woman. In Colorado, appointees were to be nominated by the state federation. Mrs. W. D. Beard, under whose federation presi- dency the first traveling libraries were sent out in Tennessee, became a library commissioner. Legislation passed by women in Maryland cre- ated a four-member state commission, with two of the appointees desig- nated to be women. In Illinois, after fourteen years of work to create the Illinois Library Extension Commission, the clubs were rewarded with the appointment of Mrs. Eugenia Bacon. Mrs. Bacon had testified endlessly in support of the various bills over the years, and had been president of the Illinois Federation. She was the only woman ever to serve on the commission, and she held the office for ten years. Founding Libraries As has been mentioned earlier, the General Federation of Women's Clubs gave work for libraries a high priority toward the end of its first decade. A committee on library extension was called for at the fourth biennial in 1898 to focus federation efforts and to provide guidance to the state federations and information to individual clubs. Groups of women worked to found libraries in their communities, however, long before inspiration and direction came from the organized club movement. Some of this very early work took place in Michigan and is com- memorated in a volume published by the Ladies' Library Association of Adrian, Michigan, in 1876 to summarize "the noble work" of the women of the state in "the accumulation of libraries" [33, p. 5]. The women of Adrian conducted a thorough survey, even employing the aid of the Detroit newspapers to advertise for information. The result was individual descriptive histories of the library work of twenty-six ladies' library associations, which were edited and compiled into a vol- ume to be submitted to the Woman's Department at the International Centennial Exhibition and deposited in the Michigan State Library. The histories describe the formation as early as 1863 of associations for the purpose of establishing public libraries, each with an interesting history. It was a woman who had visited Boston who brought the library idea back to Corunna, Michigan, in 1863. In Port Huron, the library was a direct descendant and beneficiary of Civil War soldiers' aid, whose remaining assets were given in 1865 to a newly formed association for
FOUNDING MOTHERS 249 the "mental betterment of the members and the formation of a library" [33, p. 105]. In most cases these libraries began on a subscription basis with a small membership fee and minimal annual dues, as in Albion, where the "membership fee has been placed at an almost nominal fig- ure, viz: $1.50, with yearly dues fifty cents, thus extending its privileges to all" [33, p. 28]. Supplementary support came from donations of books and funds raised by the ladies through entertainments. The ladies' library societies were quite earnest in their desire to make books available to everyone. The hope expressed for her library by the historian of the Ypsilanti Ladies' Library Association is typical: "When it can be opened every day, and be absolutely free to all readers, without regard to color, sex or race, the best wishes of its founders will have been realized" [33, p. 142]. The women's efforts were sometimes viewed with suspicion; for ex- ample, it is reported that the Coldwater association's Fourth of July fund-raiser was not well supported, owing to a "misapprehension of its character, some timid hearts apparently fearing that lest, unawares, they were entrapped into some women's rights movement" [33, p. 50]. A lengthy explanation by the Quincy Society historian of why the member- ship is limited to women does provide the emerging outline of what was, in fact, a true movement to expand the limits of women's lives and open new possibilities for them in society in general and in the world of work: The reasons for causing this society to be formed exclusively of ladies, were: First, their desire to obtain practical knowledge in conducting primary meetings, where certain forms and rules are observed, the better to facilitate business. Second, a fear lest their timidity and ignorance in such matters would defeat the object sought, if gentlemen were admitted, whose superior advantages for acquiring a knowledge of such matters, are far beyond those of ladies. Indeed, circumstances oblige gentlemen to become familiar with the discipline of orga- nized meetings, and the leadership would naturally fall upon them. And here let me digress, to repel the slur cast upon woman for her ignorance in all governmental matters, which is often attributed to her indifference and inability to comprehend the work. I believe all women feel and deplore this deficiency in their education, but they hitherto had no help-no impelling outside force to compel them to act, and have been obliged to wait for the slow process of evolution, to bring them forward to the time, when they shall demand and obtain a right to look after their own interests. This accomplished, we shall hear no more about indifference or incompetency, for self-interest, a desire and conscious power to promote the good of humanity-to better their own condi- tion-the exaltation of feeling resulting from the knowledge that there is no impediment to their becoming and doing all that mortal can do, or be-that there is no disability. When they can throw off that feeling which attaches to minors, and know they have power and responsibility; above all, when necessity forces them to learn by empowering them with responsibility, then will they stand side by side with man, his cherished co-workers. [33, p. 120]
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY In many towns, "the gentlemen" were supportive, and the local newspa- per was often a staunch ally. Conscientious and thoughtful protoprofessionals, the Michigan ladies grappled with problems that seriously concerned early public librarians as well and that still bedevil public libraries today. Early library readers took sides on the question of whether fiction should be provided in free public libraries and on what the quality of fictional offerings should be. Their views depended on whether they thought the public library should respond to demand and satisfy the needs of all its users or whether they thought it should play a primarily educational role." The ladies of Blissfield, taking the library-as-educator line, vowed "to exclude all books having the least pernicious tendency, and admit only those that are of a pure and moral tone." The ladies of Owosso recognized the need for light reading, but declared they would strive "to cultivate a taste for better and more nourishing mental food," especially among young readers. The women of St. Clair and Ann Arbor pondered the value versus demand question, wondering to what extent to buy "stories of a day," which soon lose their popular appeal, as opposed to investing in more solid fare. The Ann Arbor historian explained her associates' selection policy as follows: "Though histories, scientific works and bibli- ographies are for the most part uncalled for, yet we are proud to have them on our shelves, that the few who prefer knowledge to mere amuse- ment may not find us wanting in what is of real and lasting value" [33, p. 39]. Her St. Clair sisters might claim even greater pride at having succeeded in elevating reader tastes: "At the outset there was much greater call for the lighter literature.... The library is now very fre- quently adding scientific works of value, as well as many standard histo- ries, which are eagerly sought after" [33, p. 37]. These early amateur librarians anticipated by many years attention of the library profession to the needs of children, an issue not formally placed before the American Library Association membership until 1890. The Coldwater Association Library had twenty-two hundred volumes in 1876, of which three hundred were for children, "the Board enlarg- ing [this department] as fast as means permit, and desirable books can be found" [33, p. 401.12 11. Early library literature is full of expressions on either side of this issue. The views on the appropriate place of fiction in the public library have been summarized in Esther Carrier's books on the subject [34, 35]. 12. It was in the same year that W. I. Fletcher urged the abolition of restrictions on children's use of libraries in his chapter in the epoch-making report Public Libranies in the United States of America, published by the U.S. Bureau of Education [36]. It was not until the 1 890s that the library profession became actively and generally interested in services to children.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 251 The subtitle of Phyllis Hamner's thesis on Michigan ladies' library associations describes them as "a curious byway in library history" [37]. In fact, the ladies' library associations of Michigan were not at all unique, though they may have been better documented owing to the initiative of the women of Adrian. Women formed societies to found libraries in Cardington, Ohio (nine women in 1878); in Cadiz, Ohio (after one woman proposed a donation of one thousand dollars for the purpose) [38, pp. 87, 90]; in St. Cloud, Minnesota (where the Reading Room Society was formed in 1880) [39]; in Ottawa, Kansas (ten ladies each gave one dollar in 1871) [40]; and Bloomington, Illinois (the ladies raised five hundred dollars in 1856 and had better success later with a Thanksgiving talent show as a fund-raiser than with a talk by Abraham Lincoln titled "Discoveries and Inventions" [41]. The list of women's clubs organized specifically to found libraries is lengthy. A few more detailed accounts of the activities of some of them may be illuminating. In Cairo, Illinois, the Woman's Club and Library Association was or- ganized in 1875, nineteen years before the formation of the Illinois Federation of Women's Clubs, for the purpose of founding a free li- brary. As sometimes occurred in other communities at this time, the association also had male members. However, it was the females who were the officers and trustees of the association and its activists. In 1877, the group established a subscription library in rooms in the bank build- ing and then, in 1882, the club offered the library to the city for the free use of the public. An ordinance was passed to support the library and Anna Safford, a charter member of the association and a library board member, decided to purchase a site and erect a grand building for the library in memory of her late husband to house twenty thousand volumes and a museum. The women's club also maintained quarters in the library building. Club members were designated to hold five seats on the library board by the deed of the gift and continued to work for the interests of the library for many years to come. Isabella Laning Candee, a former member of the Board of Lady Managers of the Co- lumbian Exposition, served as able longtime president of the library board and later became the first president of the Illinois Federation [42]. At the other end of the state, a similarly civic-minded group of women undertook to found a public library in Geneva, Illinois, which gained tax support in 1894. Interest in founding a library in Geneva first sur- faced in the 1 870s, and a group of local men formed the Geneva Library Association, a subscription library, in 1873, with a reading room open to the public. Like many libraries of its type at this period, this one found financial survival difficult and failed within a short time. Foundation of a public library continued as a goal of the Geneva Improvement Associa-
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion (GIA), a second organization of civic-minded men formed in 1884. The men made little concrete progress, however, until the ladies of Geneva offered to join forces with them in the GIA. Things really began to happen when the Young Mother's Club of the GIA took the effort to form a library in hand. They lobbied for a tax for a reading room, collected several hundred books, and cataloged them. Through the usual entertainments and fund-raisers, they began to accumulate money for a library building, and by 1894 had about seventeen hundred dol- lars. They secured a site for the library and formed a stock company. A decidedly ambitious program was begun to erect a building that would form the center of social and cultural life in Geneva, housing not only a library but also a five-hundred-seat hail. Sufficient funds could not be raised to complete the building, and the walls of the unfinished struc- ture stood for several years until the clubwomen learned of the benefi- cence of Andrew Carnegie, who offered a grant of seventy-five hundred dollars in 1907. Through the years of keeping the library idea alive, the clubwomen had the full support of the local newspaper, the Geneva Republican, which, like many local papers of the period, devoted a regular column to club activities. Describing itself as a "crank sheet" on the subject of public libraries, the paper put a public library first among the three things needed for Geneva to attain "metropolitan usefulness" (the other two being a water works and electric lights). Lists of books for the library were published sometimes on the front page of the paper, and educa- tional pieces prepared by the association appeared regularly in the club column on such topics as "What Does the Public Library Do for the Community?" "Book Knowledge vs. Knowledge of Books," or "Culture without College." As an aid in the campaign to raise money for the library building, the paper brought out on donated paper the Woman's Republican on June 22, 1895, an issue written and edited by clubwomen that earned $275 [43]. It was often the case for libraries founded by women's groups in small towns that the women served as the first librarians, in many communities taking turns at keeping the library open. In Geneva, care of the library was placed in the hands of Julia Plato Harvey, the first woman to serve as president of the Geneva Improvement Assocation. Mrs. Harvey was also an officer in the stock company. She had been president of the Chicago Women's Club and later proposed formation of the Illinois Federation of Women's Clubs in 1894. She moved on to national promi- nence as vice president of the General Federation of Women's Clubs in 1892. The Geneva Republican notes on December 14, 1895, that Mrs. Harvey was willing to extend hours to include Saturday afternoon and every evening without a pay raise so that "it might not be said that there
FOUNDING MOTHERS 253 was not each evening one warm and profitable place open in Geneva where anyone may pass the evening" [43]. The women of Geneva assumed responsibility for decoration of the reading room and loaned money to the library for operations. After construction on the building stopped, they assumed the tax burden on the unfinished structure. They are credited with having contributed almost five thousand dollars to the library during its struggle to be born. The women started a story hour for children, which they supported for many years, and maintained five traveling libraries for the county, two of which became the nuclei for public libraries in other towns. Geneva clubwomen's interest in general library affairs and their desire to have a properly managed library was so strong that they arranged for a course of twelve library lectures in 1897. These were offered by Katherine Sharp, then director of the Library School of the Armour Institute, and provided by the extension division of the University of Chicago. The thirty-six dollars needed to fund the series was supplied by the annual dues of the study club and by contributions solicited from Geneva teachers. Lectures in the series, which were summarized in the club column in the Geneva Republican, treated the following topics: li- brary extension, library training, traveling libraries, library schools, li- brary associations, buying books, libraries and schools, children's read- ing, and the cataloging and classification of books. Clubwomen learned, among other things, of the American Library Association's recognition of women's clubs as a force for founding libraries, of ALA's support of interlibrary lending, of the good that can be done in remote areas by the traveling library, and about national bibliography, tools for select- ing the "best" books, and techniques for identifying rare editions.'3 The library foundings in the Michigan towns, in Cairo and Geneva, Illinois, and in others mentioned as examples above occurred during the post-Civil War period of the nineteenth century in the older mid- western states where much activity occurred before club federations had mobilized behind the library idea. In newer, frontier states like Okla- homa and Texas, federations of clubs were formed and endorsed library extension as work of the highest priority earlier in the life of the state and made more sweeping and coordinated contributions to public li- brary development. The Texas Federation of Women's Clubs was formed in 1898 and designated the foundation of public libraries as its particular work, pass- ing a resolution at its first meeting to establish a five-member library 13. The essentials of the Geneva Improvement Association story are presented in a U.S. bicentennial town history produced by local historians [44] and in an unpublished pamphlet distributed by the Geneva Public Library.
254 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY committee and, as has been mentioned earlier, to propose formation of a cooperating committee of influential men. Mrs. J. C. Terrell, chair of this first library committee, who was later honored as the "Mother of Texas Libraries," began the work with a letter to the federated clubs of Texas calling for their commitment "to agitate the question of local libraries; thus fostering and educating public sentiment in this direction until the radiating influence shall compass the state, compelling more favorable legislation" [17, p. 108]. By the second federation meeting, the committee had published the first book of data on libraries in Texas, a small pamphlet reporting library activities in twenty-six communities. The response to the committee's call for action was impressive. Women's clubs all over the state began gathering together library collections, working to support them, making them free to the public, and boldly taking it upon themselves to solicit Andrew Carnegie for funds for li- brary buildings. The Texas Federation was also the driving force behind the formation of the Texas Library Association, soliciting support from the president of the University of Texas and the university librarian. The office of second vice president of the association was held by the federation Li- brary Committee chair until 1910. Considerably more than half the members listed on the first year's roster were women's clubs or individ- ual clubwomen who were not librarians. There were 113 members, of which fifty-seven were clubs, fourteen were libraries, and eighteen were librarians. It was the dues of these women and their clubs, in fact, that paid for the initial effort of the association, the publication of the first Handbook of Texas Libraries in 1904 [5]. This slender volume provides historical sketches of all libraries for which information could be ob- tained by survey at that time. Women's clubs are identified as organizers and nurturers of twenty-seven libraries described, or almost all the pub- lic libraries profiled. The Texas Federation also promoted education for librarians in Texas by convincing the first cataloger at the University of Texas library to offer a course in library economy in 1901. The federation also worked for ten years for passage of legislation that cre- ated the Texas Library and Historical Commission. Texas librarians' debt to clubwomen is warmly acknowledged in the dedication to the 1935 Handbook of Texas Libraries, where the first three federation presi- dents and the first chair of the Library Committee are placed on the top of the list of "pioneers of the free public library in Texas" [ 17, p. 3]. The Houston Lyceum and Andrew Carnegie Library presents an in- teresting example of female force in library founding. It differs from previous examples presented in that it illustrates women's library work in a sizable city, since Houston had a population of sixty thousand in 1904, the year the Carnegie Library opened. The foundations for the
FOUNDING MOTHERS 255 public library were laid as early as 1848 (before the official beginning of the public library movement marked by the founding of the Boston Public Library), when a group of men established the Houston Lyceum. The library idea was kept alive through many vicissitudes by various men or groups of men, but it rarely flourished (not even after women were admitted as active members in 1887). The turning point for the Lyceum came in 1895 with the appointment of a female librarian who aggressively put the library's case before the women's clubs of the city. In 1895 the president of the Ladies Reading Club, in turn, appealed to the membership to act on a plan to aid in bringing to full maturity the library idea first conceived in 1848. Her proposal was that club- women petition the Lyceum to relocate to a building that was more convenient to the public, especially to ladies. In return for this consider- ation, the women would pay membership dues as well as a five-dollar- per-month contribution for rent on the new quarters. The city's teachers were enlisted as allies. In 1898 the move was accomplished and the women soon recognized the need for dependable municipal support, especially for the purchase of books. They staged an entertainment for the mayor and the city council on the assumption that the empty shelves in the library would be mute testimony for the need for volumes to fill them. The strategy worked and a twenty-four-thousand-dollar annual appropriation was provided. In 1899 the club appointed Mrs. W. E. Kendall and Miss Mamie Gearing to write to Andrew Carnegie re- questing a grant for a library building for Houston. Carnegie proposed a gift of fifty thousand dollars, and an ordinance to provide tax support of four thousand dollars annually was voted to meet his conditions. Mrs. H. F. Ring, who was to serve as chair of the Texas Federation Library Committee, moved to form a City Federation of Clubs, which, after a year, had managed to raise $7,880 for the purchase of an appro- priate site, and the entirely fireproof Italian renaissance-style building was opened in 1904 [45]. Mrs. Kendall and Miss Gearing were by no means the only Texas women to put themselves in contact with Andrew Carnegie. Mrs. D. W. Waggoner of Cleburne visited Carnegie in New York. Mrs. Henry Exall of Dallas contacted him on behalf of a library association formed and supported through the efforts of women. In Fort Worth, Carnegie pledged a fifty-thousand-dollar grant in response to Mrs. D. B. Keeler. In Greenville, Mrs. W. A. Williams drew up such a convincing case for her community that Carnegie responded favorably within a mere ten days. She and her fellow clubwomen pledged two-thirds of the amount needed to secure the grant. In Banks, the president of the City Federa- tion of Women's Clubs made the proposal to Carnegie, and in Terrell, the women's club first secured an appropriation from the city before
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY approaching Carnegie. Women, having obtained the Carnegie grant for Waco, continued work to raise funds for books. Grants obtained through women's efforts for Carnegie libraries described in the 1904 Handbook of Texas Libraries totaled three hundred twenty thousand dollars, and Texas women were to secure further grants in future years [5]. In Oklahoma, too, there was massive club involvement in the early development of libraries statewide. In 1937, to celebrate its thirtieth anniversary, the Oklahoma Library Commission published a history of state library growth, covering all types of libraries and library-related activities [46]. The report identified the existence of seventy public li- braries in the state. Women's clubs are credited with direct responsibility for founding 77 percent of these (fifty-four) and with material aid in the organization of the remainder. A section of the volume is devoted to individual histories of each of the seventy public libraries. History after history states that the idea for the town library originated with a women's club in the community. It is reported, for example, that only four weeks after the first settler arrived in Hobart, two ladies called on the newspaper editor soliciting subscriptions for a free library and read- ing room. Just ten days later, the reading room was opened [46, p. 52]. Similar and familiar patterns of development recur repeatedly. The club gathers a small library by means of donations or through fund- raising efforts. The library is housed over a drugstore or a bank at first, or in a member's home, and is moved several times before a permanent building is constructed or other appropriate quarters are procured. Clubwomen serve as the first librarians and work tirelessly to provide support to the library until municipal support is made available. Often the succession of tag days, book socials, bake sales, flower sales, enter- tainments, and lecture goes on for years: eighteen years in Blackwell, seventeen years in Broken Arrow, twelve years in Alva, eleven years in Bristow. In many towns, the clubwomen organize to solicit the gift of a building from Andrew Carnegie, in some cases pressing the cause themselves; in others, enlisting a prominent businessman to make the proposal. Mrs. Selwyn Douglas, who was to serve as president of the Federation of Women's Clubs of Oklahoma and the Indian Territories, herself wrote the letter of solicitation to Carnegie for a grant in support of a library building for Oklahoma City. On the other hand, Mrs. Hosea Townsend, who pressed for a library in Ardmore in the Indian Terri- tory before whites had civil rights there, first communicated personally with Carnegie, and then, "feeling . . . as women were often made to feel at the turn of the century, that she was overstepping the mark by engaging in business affairs," persuaded a local banker to complete the negotiations for the fifteen-thousand-dollar grant [46, p. 18].
FOUNDING MOTHERS 257 In 1937 in Oklahoma, there were still towns too small to maintain, or that were not yet convinced of the need for, a municipally supported library for all citizens. In many of these towns, clubwomen supported free libraries open to the general public, and several of these are pro- filed in Library Commission history. Since Oklahoma did not become a state until 1907, library development began later here and the public library idea was not able to take firm root before the dislocations, finan- cial and otherwise, caused by World War I and the depression. Several libraries started before the war closed during its progress, to be re- opened later, again often through the offices of women's clubs. Main- taining support to many libraries in Oklahoma during the depression years was a grueling struggle for local clubwomen, and during this pe- riod they sometimes turned for aid to the Youth Works Administration. Since Carnegie gifts for libraries stopped in 1919, during the depres- sion, clubwomen, always on the lookout for ways to advance their cause, turned to the Works Progress Administration to build library structures in their communities. The record of library achievement of Oklahoma clubwomen is re- markable and extends to almost every phase of state library activity. Clubwomen worked for the establishment of a Library Commission and for the passage of a county library law in 1937. They were also involved in the establishment of the library on the campus of Oklahoma State University and in the building of the State Museum and Historical Li- brary. Clubwomen were among the charter members of the Oklahoma State Library Association and offered reciprocal membership in the Oklahoma Federation to the association, which sent a delegate to federa- tion meetings. Club Work in Context In her brief introduction to club contributions to libraries cited earlier, Scott suggested that, once the full extent of this work had been docu- mented, it would be necessary to rewrite the history of public libraries in America [6, p. 404]. It seems more accurate to say that club work for libraries is part of a history that has, in fact, yet to be written. Donald Davis and John Tucker, in their exhaustive bibliography of library his- tory, point to a recent dearth of full-length monographic studies of American library development [47, pp. 16, 75-78]. There have been some important contributions to our knowledge of certain periods (for example, Wayne Wiegand's study of public libraries in World War I [48]) and valuable histories of library development in various states. There has also been significant work on the development of librarian-
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ship as a profession (Wayne Wiegand's Politics of an Emerging Profession [49] and Dee Garrison's Apostles of Culture [50], for example) that sheds light on the history of public libraries, but no major monograph has appeared tracing library development from the late nineteenth century to the present. In updating his 1945 evaluation of the literature of American library history in 1973, Jesse Shera, himself a major contribu- tor, places only three full-length works in the first rank as historical writing on public libraries in the United States: his own Foundations of the Public Library [51], Ditzion's Arsenals of a Democratic Culture [7], and Gwladys Spencer's History of the Chicago Public Library [52], which he characterizes as a history of libraries in Illinois. "Spencer, Ditzion, and Shera set the pattern for a comprehensive history of the American li- brary movement, though at this writing such a generalized treatment has not yet appeared" [53, p. 145]. Shera explored the early years, and Ditzion, as Shera says himself, "began where the present writer's work stopped," to bring the writing of American public library history more or less to 1900 [53, p. 145]. Comprehensive historical writing on the public library movement seems to stop at this point, just when free libraries began to multiply exponentially and when scattered groups of women in different states began to work vigorously for libraries in their communities. Article-length speculations on how the public library idea spread to all parts of the country from its seedbed in the urban northeast are few. Haynes McMullen, whose work on public libraries was focused primarily on developments before 1876, compiled some interesting data on the distribution of public libraries [54] and he also studied whether the spread of social libraries in three midwestern states could be linked to any of several factors including, for example, population density [55]. Additional work on social libraries included his analysis of their slower- than-expected decline [56]. McMullen recognized the existence of ladies' libraries and, in fact, published a tantalizing list of some of the earliest examples based on notes passed on to him by Shera [57]. However, he gives no special attention to women's clubs as library founders except in the case of Michigan, the site, as he points out, of more than one-half of institutions identified as ladies' library association libraries in the 1876 list. He concludes, presumably based on his reading of the Bixby and Howell volume, but with no specific reference to it [33], that in Michigan "women had, for some reason, become intensely interested in establish- ing libraries, sometimes admittedly to compete with existing social li- braries which were dominated by males" [54, pp. 34-35]. One cause for the relative statistical strength of social libraries in comparison to public libraries that he documents in [56] might be the number of em-
FOUNDING MOTHERS 259 bryonic public libraries started as social libraries by women's clubs and nurtured through years of struggle toward municipal support. Articles by John Colson, Raymond Wood, and Donald Davis test the hypothesis that social libraries were transplanted from New England to form the basis of public libraries in Wisconsin, California, and Texas [9, 58, 59]. As has already been mentioned, only Davis, who studied library develop- ment in Texas, places a positive value on the contribution of women's clubs. As to the treatment of women's club relationship to libraries in the standard texts, in Arsenals of a Democratic Culture, Ditzion briefly exam- ines the relationship of women to the library movement and concludes that their most important contribution was their eagerness to use the facilities of public libraries. "It was as if in gratitude [for their opportu- nity to use libraries] that women's organizations, once strong enough to be an active force in their communities, expended a good deal of their strength in furthering the cause of public libraries" [7, p. 83]. Ditzion goes on to stress the importance of librarianship as a career for women aspiring to equal rights, but concludes it is difficult to accept the thesis that women's clubs constituted the "push" of the movement. The real function of the women's organizations in the public library movement was rather to crusade in small towns which were tardy in supporting a library, to stir up interest in slow states by lobbying for legislation, and to carry the movement to recently settled or educationally backward parts of the country. The last decade of the nineteenth century found women's organizations feverishly campaigning for free libraries in the Middle and Far West and, at the very end of the century, trying to stir up interest in the South. [7, p. 83] These comments of Ditzion make women's efforts for libraries in ar- eas outside the northeast appear frenetic and almost unseemly in their zeal. Later he reveals the origin of the "thesis that women's clubs were the 'push' of the movement." In his second-to-last chapter, where he reviews likely contributors to the growth of public libraries, he explains that to cast more light on his topic, he undertook an unscientific survey of librarians who were working in the field before 1900. In a question asking their views on the "possible motivating circumstances" for library formation he listed the "influence of organizations, e.g., women's clubs; reading associations; working-men's clubs and organizations" as a poten- tial factor. He summarizes the arguments of those who suggest the im- portance of women's clubs in the development of public libraries as follows: "To those who knew the movement only in the last years of the century, the activities of women's organizations stand out as being the main prop of the movement. This is especially true of those who were working in the Middle West during these years." The respondents
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY (whose letters "are emphatic in their insistence that the movement in Missouri, Kansas, Iowa, and Nebraska was the work of women's clubs") were all women, and included, for example, Clara Baldwin, secretary of the Library Commission of Minnesota and chair of the Library Exten- sion Committee of the General Federation of Women's Clubs. Ditzion's discussion here and earlier in the book makes clear that he is not at all convinced that women's clubs played an important role in public library development [7, p. 1721. George Bobinski, later chronicler of Carnegie library gifts, also takes his turn at identifying causes of the public library movement. He men- tions the importance of "energetic leaders in each community who rec- ognized the need for a public library and who were able to persuade the majority of their fellow citizens to vote for financial support." He also cites philanthropy and "the recognition of the need to provide li- brary service to all the people, including those in the sparsely populated and less prosperous areas, [which] forced the states into the position of playing a more aggressive role" [8, p. 91. Despite their role in building public sentiment in support of libraries in cities as large as Houston and Oklahoma City and their agitation for state library commissions in state after state, women's clubs (admittedly along with some male mayors and city council members) find their way into Bobinksi's narrative only as bewildered and dithering supplicants. We learn of the ladies of Guthrie Center, Iowa, who were amassing a mile of pennies for their library and asked Carnegie to put something in an envelope for them, and of the ladies of Hobart, Indiana, who were in the dark as to how to arrange for tax support and had to be referred to the Indiana Library Commission for assistance by Bertram, Carnegie's exasperated secre- tary. We hear also of the members of the Twentieth Century Club of Ponca City, Oklahoma, who "remembering the scriptured injunction 'ask and ye shall receive' have . . . overcome our timidity to the extent of asking for a donation" [8, p. 36]. Interestingly, there is another pub- lished rendition of the Ponca City story. There it is reported that the women of Ponca City had been working for a tax-supported library for six years even though their town was too small to qualify under state law. The library had grown from fifty to five hundred volumes "when in 1901 Mrs. W. T. Oates, a club member, wrote a letter to Andrew Carnegie which brought his check for $6,500 for a building" [46, p. 82]. Perhaps Carnegie was impressed that the club had plans to do- nate not only its own library to the city but also the lots for the site. Mrs. Oates, that woman of simple faith who asked that she might re- ceive, served on the library board for twenty-five years, very likely up to the time when the Carnegie structure was replaced with the first air-conditioned library building in Oklahoma constructed as a
FOUNDING MOTHERS 261 one-hundred-thousand-dollar Public Works Administration project in 1935 [46, pp. 81-82]. Although the later, so-called revisionist, library historians did not do so explicitly, they might well have used clubwomen's relation to libraries to support some of their arguments. Had Michael Harris wanted to allude to the founding activities of clubwomen, he might have argued that they were, more than anything else, spiritual descendants of the "brahmin" class of library founders whose motivations he found so de- ceptive and deficient [60]. The average club member, after all, was pros- perous, middle-aged, white, and aspiring to "high" culture. Many had eastern backgrounds. Some became members of library boards and were, as such, not significantly different in terms of social background from their male counterparts. Despite the professions of altruism so frequent in their writings, closer analysis or additional investigation may show that the women's desire to civilize the Kentucky mountain folk or the people of the New Jersey pine woods was, in fact, founded in condescension and motivated by a moralistic and controlling approach to raising the intellectual tone of those who would benefit from the library services they advocated. Davis specifically explores this hypothe- sis in relation to the social libraries founded by women that were the precursors of free public libraries in Texas, and finds it without founda- tion. "The social libraries, established largely through the efforts of cul- turally-minded women, sought to provide intellectual stimulation within the community through the study of history, literature, and practical 'self-help' knowledge. . . . Throughout the early years of the public library movement [in Texas], 1898-1920, the most frequently repeated theme is the role of books and libraries in the relief of drudgery, indicat- ing the notion of life enrichment. . . . A second theme is education, the social uplift notion. Both these themes reflect more the concept of social betterment for its own sake, than social indoctrination or con- trol suggested by others as motives of early public library leaders" [9, p. 177]. Clubwomen were certainly quite interested in the selection of books for traveling libraries and they also had ideas about what belonged on the shelves of public libraries. These ideas were undoubtedly influenced by their social class, their sex, and the prevailing ideas of what consti- tuted good literature, but more study is needed before concluding that clubwomen were attempting to impose bourgeois or gender-based values on the lower classes. The observations in 1898 of the chair of the Illinois Federation Sub-Committee on Libraries are relevant in this context. In many places the library is now considered an aristocratic institution to which the poorly dressed man or woman feels he has no right to go. In such places it loses all opportunity to influence the masses, so called; as Miss Taylor
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of this Committee aptly says: "The public library movement is so young that the cardinal principle that the library is for the people has not been generally grasped." Learn from your librarian who come most freely to the library; if it is "the best people," so-called, of the town, know that something is radically wrong and should be remedied. If the children do not flock to the library soon after 4 o'clock, know that your library is failing in its most important duty. [61, p. 27] Wood, writing on the growth of libraries in California, places women's clubs among the forces of "conservatism" that led to the failure of the public library as a social institution [59, pp. 163-64]. In Apostles of Cul- ture, Garrison relates women's clubs passingly to her own "revisionist" notion that library founders were patrician conservatives who sought to impose their bourgeois values on the rapidly expanding (and funda- mentally terrifying) uneducated masses. Like Ditzion and Bobinksi, Gar- rison treats the development of public libraries as an entirely urban phenomenon, although at the end of her argument she asserts that library development outside cities was informed by exactly the same ethos; that is, a "conservative defense in an unsettled era." The growth of free libraries across the country "was almost entirely a result of the efforts of the well-off and educated native citizens in these communi- ties." Garrison places women in clubs among this conservative, self- serving elite: "Many public libraries owed their existence to the organi- zational work of associations of leisured women" [50, p. 224]. Another central Garrison theme is the hobbling of the development of librarian- ship as a profession caused by the interaction of the "genteel elite" ten- dencies of the male library leadership with the growing number of fe- male workers in libraries. Garrison might well have added some observations regarding clubwomen to reinforce her argument, sug- gesting perhaps that the legions who volunteered their services as "li- brarians" in towns across the country, and who staged endless entertain- ments in support of libraries, contributed in a major way to the "genteel library hostess" image that she believes trivialized the profession. The hypothesis that places clubwomen unquestionably in the ranks of the supposedly conservative library founders of the revisionist historians remains to be tested. Indeed, much more work in general must be done before a truly comprehensive and accurate picture of what is loosely termed the "public library movement" emerges. Ditzion and Bobinski both agree that Carnegie, even with his astounding and far-flung finan- cial contributions to public library development, functioned as a stimu- lus rather than as an initiator [7, p. 150; 8, p. 193]. They both assert that the seeds of the movement, having been planted in the northeast, would simply have flowered and self-propagated or, if there had been
FOUNDING MOTHERS 263 no Carnegie gifts, as Ditzion puts it: "The free library had started on a firm foundation in New England and doubtless would in time have embedded itself in the public consciousness of the entire nation" [7, p. 150]. It seems clear, however, that the natural self-propagation of the library idea posited by Ditzion and Bobinski was aided by strenuous efforts to open the public mind to it, both in New England and in other regions of the country. The awakening of public sentiment in favor of libraries was the chosen work of state federations of women's clubs and individual clubs all over the United States. A thorough valuation of their contribution that also considers the work of other organizations (men's groups, for example) and takes into account the work of library commissions and state associations of librarians (and club support of these efforts) remains to be done. A more detailed examination is re- quired of the character of the "social libraries" women established after the Civil War, comparing them with their male-founded predecessors. More study is needed, too, of the differential spread of libraries in the various parts of the country, exploring the factors that retarded or accelerated development from region to region. The early close cooper- ation between clubs and librarians at the national, state, and local levels needs further investigation, as does the influence of the values of club- women on library services, for example, services to children. Detailed study leading to an overall assessment of the role of women's organizations in public library development may also contribute to the understanding of nineteenth-century feminism, a topic of continuing interest for social historians. Women's activities in support of libraries represent the kind of institution building and assertion of power through influence that Gerda Lerner identified as important topics for study in the "women in history" approach she advocated for the emerg- ing field of women's history in the 1970s. Lerner in fact included the clubwoman, along with the working woman and the trade union activist, among the "anonymous" women whose lives she thought should be studied more closely in order to establish the origins of the feminist consciousness [62, 63]. One school of feminist and social historical thought argues that the ""cult of true womanhood" (the set of Victorian ideals of piety, purity, domesticity, and submissiveness that Barbara Welter argued victimized and circumscribed women [64]) was actually used to advantage by some late nineteenth-century women to move their activities from the private to the public sphere. This line of reasoning holds that, since women were assigned the role of guardians of culture and upholders of moral values by their society, they subtly shifted their focus, as their domestic burdens diminished, from inside the home to the world at large. This shift, it is argued, allowed them to become powerful social reformers
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and to move into what were becoming the feminized professions (for example, teaching, social work, and librarianship). Julie Matthaei, among others, notes this phenomenon and assigns the term "social housekeeping" to the activities in the public sector assumed by women of this period [65, pp. 173-76]. Social historians who point to the impor- tance of these developments align themselves with Lerner and Scott, who argued early on that feminism and new self-concepts for women did not arise solely from the fight for suffrage. Others are more skepti- cal of the true progress of ordinary women toward a radical revision in their understanding of the patriarchal concepts defining their place in society during this period. These writers maintain that Welter's "woman as victim" model remains a valid one for the nineteenth century. 14 In her detailed study of the women's club movement, The Clubwoman as Feminist, Karen Blair asserts that clubwomen were representatives of what she chooses to call "domestic feminism" [67]. In her view, they manipulated their accepted role in society as upholders of cultural and moral values to escape from women's accepted domestic sphere. They gained strength from association and a shared vision of societal im- provement and found ways to influence events they had never known before. In her review of Blair's book, however, Patricia Palmieri con- cludes that the author, contrary to her intent, ends by validating the view that the prescriptive myth of womanhood really did constitute the reality and that, in fact, only a small number of clubwomen were truly feminists [68]. Blair does not spend a significant amount of time dis- cussing club work for libraries, but her book and the criticism of it by feminist scholars illustrates well why a comprehensive study of the li- brary interests of organized women is likely to provide important insight not only into the history of American library development as discussed above but also into the origins of modern feminism. Blair's portrait of club culture in part supports the widespread view that it was a white, middle-class phenomenon aimed primarily at advancing middle-class values. She notes, for example, the failure of the efforts of the Boston Women's Educational and Industrial Union to achieve meaningful benefits for working-class women, and claims no more enlightenment for clubwomen on racial issues than the society of which they were a part. Catherine Clinton, another writer on nineteenth-century women, pro- 14. For example, Jill Conway concludes that even Jane Addams, one of the most dynamic social reformers of the period, remained imprisoned in traditional concepts of femi- ninity [66].
FOUNDING MOTHERS 265 vides a different perspective on the success of women's clubs in crossing class lines in her brief portrait of the Chicago Women's Club (CWC) and its several successful projects on behalf of working-class women. She also points out that CWC's interests in education were broad enough to embrace support of an industrial school for boys. Moreover, Clinton uses the Chicago case to advance views similar to Blair's on clubwomen as feminists, pointing out that by 1890 two-thirds of club members were involved in its more activist committees and that CWC women also founded a variety of other reform movements in Chicago. As she puts it, "The women of this organization were decidedly activist, and many, if not most, were feminists" [69, p. 167]. In one of her early essays on how feminist values were spread through a women's network, Scott addresses the question of the nineteenth- century woman as victim or feminist by observing quite reasonably that there was surely a continuum of thinking along which women arrayed themselves, sometimes with a great deal of ambivalence [70]. Further study of clubwomen's devotion to the spread of libraries should help to illuminate the stages on this continuum. Some women may have seen libraries (as Wood suggests) as a means to achieve the triumph of con- ventional values. Others saw them as providing opportunities for truly improving the quality of life of others less fortunate than themselves. Some thought it beyond their place to contact Andrew Carnegie, and asked male friends or husbands to do it. Others wrote directly or sought appointments. Some buttonholed legislators in Idaho; others undoubt- edly sat quietly in the gallery waiting for the vote. As with the history of libraries, little detailed work has yet been done on clubs outside major cities, where the evils of a burgeoning lower class were less evident. Also, little has been done to differentiate among clubwomen and the motivations they may have had based on education, marital status, age, or other, possibly salient, factors such as place of birth and, in a west- ward-moving society, residence history. Detailed examination of club work for libraries also has excellent potential for adding to our under- standing of an awakening feminine political consciousness, since it in- volved women in such a high degree of organized political advocacy and ultimately resulted in fairly large-scale female participation in ap- pointive political office on library boards and commissions. Despite the work of Scott, Blair, and others,'5 there is still much to learn about the 15. Theodora Penny Martin [71] has also written a book on women's clubs that stresses the self-culture aspect of the associations, with a detailed portrait of the Decatur Art Class. Some writers on the role of women in the profession of librarianship advocate the application of the various models of women's history to this type of research and illustrate the difficulties in regard to sources in connection with this work [72-75].
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY social movement of which clubwomen were a part and about the women themselves: their background, their motivations, their methods, their leaders, their foot soldiers, their allies, and their surprisingly effective modes of communication and consensus building. While the library idea does seem simply to have sprung up among them and taken firm root wherever they were, it was surely part of larger social and intellectual currents moving, unapprehended, through their lives. REFERENCES 1. Scott, Anne Firor. Natural AUies. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991. 2. Perkins, Mrs. Charles A. "A Library Extension Work." Federation Bulletin (June 1904), pp. 188-89. 3. Official Report of the Twelfth Biennial Convention of the General Federation of Women's Clubs. Portland, Maine: Lakeside Printing Co., for Bureau of Information, General Federation of Women's Clubs, 1914. 4. Breckinridge, Sophonisba. Women in the Twentieth Century: A Study of Their Political, Social, and Economic Activities. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1933. 5. Texas State Library Association. Handbook of Texas Libraries, no. 1. Austin: Texas State Library Association, 1904. 6. Scott, Anne Firor. "Women and Libraries." In Libraries, Books, and Culture: Proceedings of Library History Seminar VII. 6-8 March 1985. Chapel Hill, North Carolina, edited by Donald G. Davis, Jr. Austin, Tex.: Graduate School of Library and Information Sci- ences, 1986. 7. Ditzion, Sydney H. Arsenals of a Democractic Culture: A Social History of the American Public Library Movement in New England and the Middle Atlantic States from 1850 to 1900. Chicago: American Library Association, 1947. 8. Bobinski, George S. Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact on American Public Li- brary Development. Chicago: American Library Association, 1969. 9. Davis, Donald. "The Rise of the Public Library in Texas: 1876-1920." In Milestones to the Present: Papers from Library History Seminar V, edited by Harold Goldstein. Syra- cuse, N.Y.: Gaylord Professional Publications, 1978. 10. Held, Ray E. Public Libraries in California, 1849-1878. University of California Publica- tions in Librarianship, vol. 4. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963. 11. Musmann, Victoria K. "Women and the Founding of Social Libraries in California, 1859-1910." Ph.D. diss., University of Southern California, 1982. 12. Anders, Mary Edna. "The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States, 1895-1950." Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1958. 13. Taylor, David. "Ladies of the Club: An Arkansas Story." Wilson Library Bulletin (Janu- ary 1985), pp. 324-27. 14. Passet, Joanne E. "Reaching the Rural Reader: Traveling Libraries in America, 1892- 1920." Libraries and Culture 26 (Winter 1991): 100-118. 15. Proceedings of the Fourth Biennial Meeting of the General Federation of Women's Clubs. Wisconsin State Historical Library, 1898. 16. Courtney, Grace Gates, comp. History of the Indiana Federation of Clubs. Fort Wayne, Ind.: Fort Wayne Printing Co., 1939. 17. Texas Library Association. Handbook of Texas Libraries, no. 4. Houston: Texas Library Association, 1935.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 267 18. Dewey, Melvil. Field and Future of Traveling Libraries. Albany: University of the State of New York, 1901. 19. Haines, Helen E. "The Growth of Traveling Libraries." World's Work 8 (September 1904): 5231-34. 20. Harcum, Mrs. Harry, et al., comps. and eds. History of the Maryland Federation of Women's Clubs, 1899-1941, vol. 1. Federalsburg, Md.: J. W. Stowell Printing Co., 1941. 21. Ward, May Alden. "Women's Clubs in New England and the Middle-Eastern States." Annals of the Ameezcan Academy of Political and Social Science (July/December 1906), pp. 205-26. 22. Leighton, Mrs. Sara T. S. "The Library Work of the Massachusetts Federation." Feder- ation Bulletin (May 1904), pp. 151-52. 23. Browning, E. G. "How Women's Clubs May Help the Library Movement." Library Journal 24 (1899): C 18-C20. 24. "Work of State Library Associations and Women's Clubs in Advancing Library Inter- ests: Roundtable Meeting." Library Journal 26 (1901): 188-90. 25. Ring, Daniel F. "Women's Club Culture and the Failure of Library Development in Illinois, Michigan and Ohio." In Carnegie Denied: Communities Reecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants, 1898-1925, edited by Robert Sydney Martin. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1993. 26. Federation Bulletin. April 1907. 27. Illinois Federation Women's Clubs. Yearbook. 1914-15. 28. Federation Bulletin. February 1905. 29. Maine State Library Commission. Report. 1899. 30. Hutchins, F. A. "How May the Federation and the Commission Cooperate to Aid Our Library Interests?" Madison, Wis., n.d. 31. Official Report of the Eleventh Biennial Convention of the General Federation of Women's Clubs. Wisconsin State Historical Library, 1912. 32. Colorado Federation of Women's Clubs. Official Yearbook. Fort Collins, Colo.: Courier Press, 1913-14. 33. Bixby, Mrs. A. F., and Howell, Mrs. A., comps. Historical Sketches of the Ladies' Library Associations of the State of Michigan. Adrian, Mich.: Times & Expositor Steam Print, 1876. 34. Carrier, Esther Jane. Fiction in Public Libraries, 1876-1900. New York: Scarecrow Press, 1965. 35. Carrier, Esther Jane. Fiction in Public Libraries, 1900-1950. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1985. 36. U.S. Bureau of Education. Public Libranres in the United States of America: Special Report: Part 1. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1876. 37. Hamner, Phyllis. "The Ladies' Library Associations of Michigan: A Curious Byway in Library History." Master's thesis, Western Reserve University, 1954. 38. Galbreath, C. B., comp. Sketches of Ohio Libraries. Columbus, Ohio: State Printer, 1902. 39. Foster, Mary Dillon. Who's Who among Minnesota Women: A History of Women's Work in Minnesota from Pioneer Days to Date, Told in Biographies, Memorials, and Records of Organizations. N.p.: Mary Dillon Foster, 1924. 40. Watson, Carrie M., and Clarke, Edith M. Handbook of Kansas Libraries. Lawrence: University of Kansas Library, 1903. 41. Wood, Lois Steege. Withers Public Library/Bloomington Public Library and Information Center: The Information Connection, 1887-1987. Bloomington, Ill.: Bloomington Public Library, 1987. 42. Lansden, John McMurray. A History of Cairo, Illinois. Chicago: R. R. Donelley & Sons, 1910.
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 43. Geneva Republican. 1891-97. 44. Ehresmann, Julia M. Geneva, Illinois: A History of Its Times and Places. Geneva, Ill.: Geneva Public Library District, 1977. 45. First Report of the Houston Lyceum and Carnegie Libraty Association. Houston, March 2, 1904. 46. Oklahoma Library Commission. Oklahoma Libraries, 1900-1937: A Hist and Hand- book. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma library Commission, 1937. 47. Davis, Donald G., Jr., and Tucker, John Mark. American Library History: A Comprehen- sive Guide. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1989. 48. Wiegand, Wayne A. "An Active Instrument for Propaganda": The American Public Library during World War I. New York: Greenwood Press, 1989. 49. Wiegand, Wayne A. The Politics of an Emerging Profession: The American Library Associa- tion, 1876-1917. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986. 50. Garrison, Dee. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920. New York: Free Press, 1979. 51. Shera, Jesse H. Foundatios of the Public Library: The Origins of the Public Library Move- ment in New England, 1629-1855. Hamden, Conn.: Shoe String Press, 1949. 52. Spencer, Gwladys. History of the Chicago Public Library. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1943. 53. Shera, Jesse H. "The Literature of American Library History." In Knowing Books and Men: Knowsng Computm Too. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1973. 54. McMullen, Haynes. "The Distribution of Libraries throughout the United States." Library Trends 25 (July 1976): 25-53. 55. McMullen, Haynes. "The Founding of Social and Public Libraries in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois through 1850." University of Illinois Library School Occasional Papers, 51. Library School, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1958. 56. McMullen, Haynes. "The Very Slow Decline of the American Social Library." Library Quarterly 55 (April 1985): 207-24. 57. McMullen, Haynes. "A Note on Early American libraries for Women." Journal of Library History 13 (Fall 1978): 464-65. 58. Colson, John. "Rise of the Public Library in Wisconsin, 1850-1920." In Mikstones to the Present: Papers from Library History Seminar V, edited by Harold Goldstein. Syracuse, N.Y.: Gaylord Professional Publications, 1978. 59. Wood, Raymond F. "Public Libraries in California, 1850-1920." In Mikstoews to the Present: Papers from Library History Seminar V, edited by Harold Goldstein. Syracuse, N.Y.: Gaylord Professional Publications, 1978. 60. Harris, Michael H. "The Role of the Public Library in American Life: A Speculative Essay." University of Illinois Graduate School of Library Science Occasional Papers, no. 117. University of Illinois Graduate School of Library Science, Urbana- Champaign, 1975. 61. Reports of the Standing Committees of the Illinois Federation of Women's Clubs at Its Fourth Annual Meeting. Chicago: N.p., 1898. 62. Lerner, Gerda. "The Majority Finds Its Past." In The Majority Finds Its Past: Placing Women in History, edited by Gerda Lerner. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979. 63. Lerner, Gerda. "The Challenge of Women's History." In The Majority Finds Its Past: Placing Women in History, edited by Gerda Lerner. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979. 64. Welter, Barbara. "The Cult of True Womanhood." American Quarterly 18 (1966): 151-75. 65. Matthaei, Julie A. An Economic History of Women in America: Women's Work, the Sexual Divion of Labor and the Development of Capitalism. New York: Schocken Books, 1982.
FOUNDING MOTHERS 269 66. Conway, Jill. "Woman Reformers and American Culture." Journal of Social History 5 (1972): 164-77. 67. Blair, Karen J. The Clubwoman as Feminist: True Womanhood Redefined, 1868-1914. New York: Holmes & Meier, 1980. 68. Palmieri, Patricia Ann. Review of The Clubwoman as Femninist, by Karen J. Blair. Harvard Educational Review 52 (August 1982): 344-47. 69. Clinton, Catherine. The Other Civil War: Amertcan Women in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Hill & Wang, 1984. 70. Scott, Anne Firor. "The Ever-Widening Circle: The Diffusion of Feminist Values from the Troy Female Seminary, 1822-72." In Making the Invisible Woman Visible, edited by Anne Firor Scott. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1984. 71. Martin, Theodora Penny. The Sound of Our Own Voices: Women's Study Clubs, 1860- 1910. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987. 72. Dain Phyllis. "Women's Studies in American Library History: Some Critical Reflec- tions." Journal of Library History 18 (Fall 1983): 450-63. 73. Grotzinger, Laurel. "Bibliographical Research: Recognition Denied."Joumal of Library History 18 (Fall 1983): 372-81. 74. Hildenbrand, Suzanne. "Some Theoretical Considerations on Women in Library His- tory." Journal of Library History 18 (Fall 1983): 382-89. 75. Maack, Mary Niles. "Towards a History of Women in Librarianship: A Critical Analy- sis with Suggestions for Further Research."Journal of Library History 17 (Spring 1982): 164-85.