1 6 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Speaking Out: Analysis of the Experi- ences and Opinions Reported by Recent Graduates of the University of South Carolina's MLIS Program By Gayle Douglas This study identifies differences in the experiences of traditional students and distant learners who recently completed the University of South Carolina's Master of Library and Information Science program. Despite the program's emphasis on full student participation and the same instructional experience regardless of distance, this study identifies a number of demographic characteristics that make achieving that goal difficult, if not impossible. Survey respondents offer contrasting opinions of campus-based and televised courses as well as disparate levels of program satisfaction, interaction, resource availability, and early career progress. Introduction The purpose of this study was to determine if there are significant differences in the experiences of recent graduates who participated in the University of South Carolina's (USC's) Master of Library and Information Science (MLIS) program as (1) traditional students in South Carolina, (2) distant learners in South Carolina, or (3) distant learners in cohorts in other states. Survey respondents offer consistent, yet sharply contrasting opinions of courses on the Columbia campus and courses televised to other sites. Demographics for the three groups provide a basis for explaining the variance in their reactions to questions concerning program satisfaction, interaction with faculty and other students, patterns of locating resources with which to complete assignments, and early career progress. USC faculty make every effort to offer students the same instructional experience regardless of their location. Socialization and student interaction are enforced as well as encouraged. Although the graduates surveyed took the same classes at the same time, the patterns of their responses suggest striking discrepancies in their actual experiences and in their instructional preferences. Methodology In its continuous cycle of assessment, the USC College of Library and Information Science conducts a comprehensive survey of alumni every few years. The survey consists of two parts. The first part is a forced choice section of Likert Scale responses to questions concerning courses, faculty, delivery systems, and socialization. The second section contains questions related to demographics, career progress, and professional activities. Responses to these questions were also forced, with some information (age, salary, etc.) stated in ranges. The complete text of the 1998 survey is available from the author. Six hundred and ninety-eight students completed the University of South Carolina MLIS program from December 1994 through Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 1 7 About the Author Gayle Douglas is Assistant Dean, College of Library and Information Science, University of South Carolina, Columbia. May 1998. Forty- three graduates were not contacted because the college did not have a current address for them, and eleven surveys were returned as undeliverable. Thus the useable population for this study numbered 644. A total of 343 surveys (53%) were returned. Survey responses were entered into a spreadsheet and grouped according to the number of televised courses taken during the thirty-six credit hour (normally twelve courses) MLIS program. The South Carolina Commission on Higher Education considers any student who completes more than fifty percent of a degree program away from the Columbia campus to be a distant learner. Based on this description, the 110 respondents who took up to six televised courses are referred to in this report as "traditional students." "Distant learners" - those students who took seven or more televised courses - were then grouped according to the state in which they lived immediately prior to entering the degree program. Students residing in Georgia, Maine, and West Virginia completed their degree programs in specific three-year time frames. These respondents (156) are referred to as "distant education cohort participants." The remaining distant learners were residents of South Carolina and a few adjoining counties in Georgia and North Carolina. This group of seventy-seven graduates are referred to as "South Carolina distant learners." Background The University of South Carolina has been a national leader in distance education for over thirty years. Live interactive televised classes reach students in many disciplines throughout the state. The USC College of Library and Information Science began televising courses in South Carolina in 1982. During the following decade, faculty became skilled in integrating advanced technologies into their courses. Satellite delivery replaced the original fixed ISDN system for the University in 1 992. The number of televised courses increased, and, with broadcasts no longer restricted to South Carolina, the college accepted invitations to deliver the full MLIS program via distance education into Georgia and West Virginia, neither of which had a publicly funded program of library and information science. The College's 1992 venture into West Virginia and Georgia was the first time in the history of library and information science education that a full MLIS degree program had been offered by an American Library Association (ALA) accredited program using distance education technologies and live interaction. In the period 1 982- 1 998, the USC College of Library and Information Science taught 339 televised courses with a total student enrollment of 17,090. Distance education technologies have enabled hundreds of South Carolina students and more than 250 students in cohorts in Georgia and West Virginia (1992-1995) and in Maine (1994- 1997) to complete USC's master's degree program in library and information science while remaining in their own communities. Most of these graduates would not have been able to leave their hometowns, families, and careers to attend classes on the Columbia campus. At the root of the college's achievement in distance education is a learning environment that encourages full student participation regardless of distance. A typical televised course may have students in the studio, in another building on campus, and in locations across South Carolina and other states. Strong emphasis is placed on Winter 2002
1 8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science socialization and student interaction. Televised courses have at least one face-to- face session for which all students meet at a central location in their states. Group projects often involve students from more than one state communicating asynchronously, and listservs are an active and lively means of dialogue among students. Course-specific Web pages provide syllabi, schedule updates, class notes, and links to outside resources. Fax machines and toll-free telephone numbers are standard communication tools, and the support system in place for students is flexible and efficient. CLIS faculty make every effort to offer traditional students and distant learners the same instructional experience. This study identifies a number of demographic characteristics, however, that make achieving that goal difficult, if not impossible, as recent graduates from South Carolina, West Virginia, Georgia, and Maine provide discerning information on their classes, their interaction with faculty and each other, and their early careers. The Students Analysis of the demographic data submitted by recent graduates provides a pattern of some rather distinct characteristics for comparing traditional students, South Carolina distant learners, and distant education cohort participants in other states. Traditional students are the youngest, with 44% in the "under thirty" age group. Less than half are married, and 22% are males. Three-fourths of the distant education cohort participants are over forty and married, and 87% ofthat group are females. In South Carolina distant learners tend to be over forty, married females. All three groups are predominantly white. Tables I-IV illustrate these trends: Part-time enrollment status is indicative of distant learners in South Carolina and in other states. Only 5% of the distant education cohort group were full-time students taking at least three courses each fall and spring; 88% attended classes on a part-time basis, taking one or two courses each semester, and 7% were able to switch from part-time to full-time. During the regular semesters, 12% of the South Carolina distant learners were full-time students and 9% switched between full-time and part-time enrollment. 59% of traditional learners pursued their MLIS degree on a full-time basis in the fall and spring semesters; 24% were part-time, and 1 7% were full-time some semesters and part-time some semesters. During the summer sessions, all distant learners enrolled in some fashion, while 7% of the traditional students took the summers off. Full-time summer school attendance was reported by 10% of the distant education cohort participants, 16% of the South Carolina distant learners, and 43% of the traditional group. When asked to state their enrollment preference, 66% of the distant education cohort participants replied that they would have chosen fall-time enrollment. Just under half of the South Carolina distant learners and 78% of the traditional learners expressed a preference for full-time enrollment. A student's employment status has a great deal to do with the decision to enroll full-time or part-time. 70% of the distant education cohort distant participants and 75% of the South Carolina distant learners were employed in permanent full-time positions while enrolled in the MLIS program. Only 24% of the traditional students worked full-time; 5% of traditional students did not work at all during their program, and 52% held graduate assistantships that required ten to twenty hours of work per week. Only 4% of the distant education cohort participants and seven percent of the South Carolina distant learners did not work while completing their degrees. Graduate assistantship opportunities were available to 3% of the South Carolina distant learners. None of the distant education cohort participants held graduate assistantships. Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 19 Table I Age Distribution 30 and Under 31-40 41-50 Over 50 DE Cohort ^2% 21.4% 56.5% 18.8% SCDE 18.7% 28.0% 33.3% 20.0% Traditionell 43.6% 24.7% 27.3% 4.5% Table II Gender Distribution Male Female DE Cohort 13.0% 87.0% SCDE 9J3% 90.7% Traditional 21.8% 78.2% Table III Marital Status Single Married Divorced Widowed DE Cohort 15.9% 75.9% ^9% 1 .4% SCDE 12.9% 72.9% 1 1 .4% 2.9% Traditional 44.6% 48.5% 6J?% O0% Table IV Race Distribution American Asian Black/Non- Hispanic White/Non- Other Indian Hispanic Hispanic DE Cohort 0.7% 0.0% 2.1% 0.0% 96.5% 0.7% SCDE 0.0% 1.4% 5.7% O0% 92.9% 0.0% Traditional 1.0% 1.0% 4.9% O0% 93.1% 0.0% Winter 2002
20 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Chart 1 compares employment status and enrollment status in the fall and spring semesters. It was not uncommon, especially in the Georgia and West Virginia cohorts, for students to have worked in libraries before they entered USC's MLIS program. Prior library experience was reported by 78% of the distant education cohort participants, 57% of the South Carolina distant learners, and 44% of the traditional students. These figures were conversely reflected by the percentages of students who completed internships as a part of their programs of study. Those with the most experience were least likely to request an internship. In reviewing the results of this survey, one must assume that a certain bias will influence students' responses to questions requiring an opinion rather than a hard fact. An important dynamic in this study is what might be called the "gratitude factor;" 94% of the distant education cohort participants and 72% of the South Carolina distant learners could not have participated in the MLIS program if televised courses had not been available. These students were quite candid in their appreciation of the opportunity to earn the degree. Only 17% of the traditional students were as dependent on televised course delivery, and several indicated that they only enrolled in televised courses to facilitate their schedules. The "gratitude factor" is perhaps most evident in response to the question, "Would you encourage others to take televised courses in the College?" The overwhelming reply from distant learners was "Yes" - 99% in cohorts and 97% in South Carolina. Traditional students were less enthused, with a response rate of sixty-eight percent indicating that they would encourage enrollment in televised courses. Chart 2 illustrates these responses. Graduates were asked to respond to a number of questions related to the courses and delivery systems they had personally experienced in their degree program. Many questions required a response for campus- based Columbia courses and another for televised courses. Comparisons were then made of the types of course delivery system as ranked by each of the three groups of respondents. It should be noted here that all respondents expressed generally high levels of course and program satisfaction. Levels of academic achievement were consistent among the groups as well. It is only by considering degrees of approval that the contrasting ratings of campus-based courses and televised courses come into focus. Courses, Faculty, and Delivery Effectiveness of Instructors' Presentations All traditional students rated their instructors' presentations in classes taught on the Columbia campus as effective or very effective. That figure decreased to 98% for South Carolina distant learners and 91% for the distant education cohort participants. For televised classes, 83% of traditional students rated their instructors' presentations to be effective or very effective. This contrasts with the 99% of South Carolina distant learners and the 98% of the distant education cohort group who rated televised class presentations effective or very effective. Course- Related Interaction with Instructors All traditional learners and all of the South Carolina distant learners reported adequate to abundant interaction with the instructors of Columbia courses. Only 83% of the distant education cohort group responded in the adequate to abundant interaction range; 95% of the South Carolina distant learners and 97% of the distant education cohort group rated their course-related interaction with their instructors as adequate to abundant in televised courses. For traditional learners in televised courses, the rate of positive response dropped to 85%. Quality of Course-Related Interaction with Instructors When asked to rate the quality of their interaction with the instructors of Columbia Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 21 Chart 1 Comparison of Enrollment Status and Employment Status Fall and Spring Semesters Chart 2 Comparison of Dependence on DE and Recommendation of DE courses, the responses good or very good were found for 99% of traditional students, 98% of South Carolina distant learners, and 100% of the distant education cohort group. For televised courses, the same responses were seen in 91% of traditional students, 95% of South Carolina distant learners, and 99% of the distant education cohort group. Level of Comfort Asking Questions and Participating in Discussions in Class Only ten respondents who were categorized as distant education cohort participants attended Columbia classes, but all who did reported they were comfortable asking questions in that situation. Of the total Winter 2002
22 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science distant education cohort participants, 81% were comfortable asking questions in televised courses. A similar pattern is seen with South Carolina distant learners and traditional students; 96% of South Carolina distant learners were comfortable asking questions when classes were on campus, but only 74% felt at ease in televised courses. 96% of traditional students were comfortable asking questions in Columbia courses, with a decrease to 63% in televised courses. Participation in class discussions is encouraged regardless of the delivery method being employed; 96% of the traditional students were comfortable participating in class discussions in Columbia courses, but only 62% in televised courses. 98% of the South Carolina distant learners were comfortable participating in class discussions on campus, as were all of the ten distant education cohort students who were able to take courses in Columbia. With televised courses, however, only 78% of the South Carolina distant learners and 75% of the distant education cohort participants said they were at ease during class discussions. Interaction with Other Students in Classes and the Quality of that Interaction 9 1 % of distant education cohort participants reported adequate to abundant interaction with their fellow students in Columbia classes as compared to 94% in televised classes. The quality of student interaction was rated good to very good by all respondents in the distant education cohort group in Columbia classes and by 99% of the distant education cohort group in televised courses. 95% of the South Carolina distant learners reported adequate to abundant interaction with their fellow students in Columbia classes as compared to 82% in televised classes. The quality of student interaction was rated good to very good by all South Carolina distant learners in Columbia classes and by 91% of the same students in televised courses. 95% of traditional students reported adequate to abundant interaction with other students in Columbia classes, and 99% rated that interaction as good or very good. In televised classes, only 75% of traditional students rated interaction with other students as adequate or abundant, and 87% found the quality of that interaction to be good or very good. When asked to indicate in ranges often the number of students with whom they were well acquainted, 24% of the South Carolina distant learners replied to the "greater than 10" categories for televised courses as compared to 1 0% for Columbia courses. 5 1 % of traditional learners considered themselves well acquainted with more than ten students in Columbia classes, but in televised classes the percentage dropped to 17%. 9% of the distant education cohort participants considered themselves well acquainted with more than ten students in Columbia classes. In televised classes that percentage rose to 32%. Involvement with Peer Support Group Students were asked the extent to which they considered themselves part of an informal peer support group. 67% of the distant education cohort participants reported being involved or very involved in a peer support group in televised courses. In Columbia courses, only 36% ofthat group replied in the affirmative. South Carolina distant learners reported little difference in their involvement in peer support groups: 54% in Columbia classes and 56% in televised classes. Traditional students reported involvement in peer support groups at the rate of 59% in Columbia classes and 44% in televised classes. Participation in Class-Related Discussions with Fellow Students 80% of traditional learners reported frequent participation in class-related discussions with fellow students after their Columbia Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 23 classes. In televised classes, the rate dropped to 51%. As with the issue of peer support, the responses from South Carolina's distant learners showed only slight variance: 67% in Columbia classes and 70% in televised classes. 82% of the distant education cohort participants were more likely to participate in discussions after televised classes than after Columbia classes (60%). Sense of Class Unity - Friendliness, Cohesiveness, Community The word "cohort" implies more than just a common experience. It suggests a sense of unity and camaraderie as well. It is not surprising, then, that the highest rating for the question pertaining to a sense of class unity, 87%, came from the distant education cohort participants in their televised classes. That sense of unity dropped to 60% in Columbia classes. On the other hand, traditional learners experienced a greater sense of unity in Columbia classes than in televised classes. Their positive responses to this question were 78% and 44% respectively. Again in the middle range are the South Carolina distant learners, 72% of whom found unity in Columbia classes, and 61% in televised classes. Involvement in and Commitment to Courses All students reported a high extent of involvement in and commitment to their courses. 99% of the traditional learners felt slightly more involved with Columbia courses than with televised courses (96%). Similarly, 99% of the South Carolina distant learners expressed greater commitment to televised courses than to Columbia courses (95%), and the figures for the cohort groups were 99% in televised courses and 90% in Columbia courses. Enjoyment of Courses All of the respondents who had experienced Columbia courses reported enjoying them more than televised courses, so again the degree of difference becomes the issue. 96% of traditional learners reported enjoyment of their Columbia courses, but for televised courses that number dropped to 67%. South Carolina distant learners preferred Columbia courses by only a small margin: 95% to 93%. When considering that distant education cohort participants unanimously reported enjoyment of their Columbia courses, one must recall that only ten of the 156 cohort respondents actually came to campus during their MLIS programs. 92% of the cohort group said they enjoyed their televised courses. Overall Quality of Courses A similar pattern of response applied to assessment of the overall quality of the courses in which these students had enrolled. Once again all cohort members gave approval to the quality of Columbia courses. South Carolina distant learners gave an approval rating of 91%, and 98% of the traditional students responded favorably. For televised courses, 94% of the distant education cohort participants gave ratings of good or very good, followed by South Carolina distant learners at 85%, and traditional students at 73%. Reference Materials Educators stress the availability of reference resources as essential to successful distance education programs. Many universities have created specific library divisions to deal with the needs of off-campus students. Still the question is often asked, "Where can distant learners go to find the reference materials they need?" That question becomes a bit more complicated when distant learners sometimes take classes on campus and when traditional students sometimes enroll in televised classes. In this study the primary source of reference materials for traditional students was Thomas Cooper Library, which is the main library on the USC's Columbia campus. This was true for televised and campus- based classes. Traditional students reported at least some use of every type of library that was listed in the survey. Winter 2002
24 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science In describing the research patterns of distant education cohort participants, it should be noted that the majority of cohort members who actually enroll in Columbia classes do so in the summer. They generally find a room on campus and take as many courses as they can so that they can speed up their degree progress. Thus it is not surprising that the main campus library is listed by these students as their primary source of reference materials for Columbia classes. In televised classes, the distant education cohort participants overwhelmingly seek materials at local academic libraries. Second and third choices are local public libraries and "other." When South Carolina distant learners take classes on campus, they, too, gravitate to the Thomas Cooper Library. Local college and university libraries are used as well. For televised classes, South Carolina distant learners first seek resources in local college and university libraries, then in local public libraries. The following tables show the responses concerning location of reference materials. Factors Affecting Decision to Enroll in Courses Available through Distance Education Distant learners were asked to indicate all of the factors that influenced their decision to enroll in courses available through distance education. The factor most often listed by the cohort group and the group of South Carolina distant learners was distance from Columbia, followed by job responsibilities, family responsibilities, time constraints, and community responsibilities. Traditional learners most often listed job responsibilities as their reason for taking televised courses, closely followed by distance from Columbia. Other factors in order of frequency were family responsibilities and time constraints. Course Delivery Preference Graduates were asked to indicate the type of course delivery they would have preferred if their personal circumstances had allowed a choice. For the distant education cohort participants and the South Carolina distant learners, 54% and 55% respectively said they would not have changed the way they took their courses. 20% of the distant education cohort participants would have preferred to take all courses on the Columbia campus, another 20% would have preferred more live courses at off-campus locations, and 7% would have liked more televised courses. South Carolina distant learners indicated similar preferences: 16% would have preferred to enroll only on the Columbia campus (with no televised classes) and 20% would have preferred face-to-face classes at a location other than the Columbia campus, presumably in their own communities. Just under 10% of the South Carolina distant learners would have preferred more televised classes. The responses from traditional students create a different picture of preferences. 68% of traditional students would have preferred to take all courses live on the Columbia campus. This figure confirms the grumbling among students on the Columbia campus who feel pressured to enroll in televised classes in order to fit a particular course into their program in a particular semester. 24% expressed no desire to have changed the way they took their classes, 7% would have preferred to take more live courses at off- campus locations, and only 1% would have preferred more televised courses. Internship and Interaction with Faculty During Internship Students in South Carolina (72% of traditional and 67% of distant learners) were more likely than distant education cohort participants to complete an internship during their MLIS program. Only 23% of the distant education cohort students had internships. This discrepancy appears to be related to library experience. Distant education cohort participants averaged slightly over eight years of library experience prior to their enrollment in the MLIS program, more than either the South Carolina distant learners (six Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 25 Table V Resources Students Used to Locate Reference Materials (Columbia Classes) Traditional DE SC DE COHORT Thomas Cooper Library, Columbia 95 22 5 USC System Campus Library 4 4 0 Local Technical College Library 1 2 0 Local Public Library 20 5 4 Local College or University Library 2 1_3 1 Local School Library 5 6 0 Other Library 3 0 0 Table VI Resources Students Used to Locate Reference Materials (Televised Classes) Traditional DE SC DE COHORT Thomas Cooper Library, Columbia 54 1_4 0 USC System Campus Library 8 TJ 3 Local Technical College Library 4 8 3 Local Public Library 25 33 33 Local College or University Library KB 4] 125 Local School Library 9 K) TJ Other Library 4 6 20 years) or the traditional students (four and a half years), so an internship may not have been appropriate for many distant education cohort students. All three groups responded positively when asked to rate the quality of the internship experience. 91% of distant education cohort participants judged the educational benefit of the internship to be good to very good, as did 98% of the distant learners in South Carolina and 96% of the traditional students. Among the traditional learners, 85% reported adequate to abundant interaction with their faculty supervisor during their internships and 91% rated the quality ofthat interaction as good to very good. 82% of the South Carolina distant learners reported adequate to abundant interaction with their faculty supervisor during their internships, and the quality ofthat interaction was rated good to very good by 92% of the respondents. The approval rating for the amount of faculty interaction during an internship dropped to 66% among the distant education cohort students, and 3 1 % ofthat group reported "very little" interaction. Similarly, only 80% ofthat group rated the quality ofthat interaction as "good" to "very good." Winter 2002
26 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Early Career Progress Effect of MLIS Degree if Person Remained in the Same Library 67% of the distant education cohort participants had the largest average amount of prior library experience and were most likely to remain in the same library after graduation. Within that library, 45% reported that earning the MLIS degree resulted in an increase in the level of their position and 53% reported an increase in their salaries. One-half of the South Carolina distant learners with prior experience remained in the same library after graduation. The degree meant an increase in their position levels for 66% ofthat group and an increase in salary for 77%. Less than one-half of the traditional learners worked in a library prior to enrolling in the MLIS program, and only 34% of those with experience remained in the same library. Of those who stayed, 48% received a position upgrade and 65% were given a raise in salary. Relationship of Program of Study to Career Path Students entering the MLIS program often plan a program of study without having a clear picture of exactly what the "real world" of library and information science is like. Even students with some prior experience may perceive professional positions in a way that is not entirely realistic. They may set their career goals on one particular area of service or type of library, only to find that environment unsuitable or unavailable. The alumni surveyed were asked a series of questions designed to gauge whether the focus of their coursework coincided to any degree with their careers, both at the entry level and in their present positions. Chart 3 illustrates the percentage of each group who reported that they had worked at some time since graduation and are presently working in the area of service upon which their MLIS programs focused. Chart 4 illustrates the percentage of each group who reported that they had worked at some time since graduation and are presently working in the type of library upon which their MLIS programs focused. Of the respondents currently working in library and information services (Chart 5), 85% of the traditional learners reported that their positions are considered professional by their organizations, and 8 1 % said that the MLIS degree was a requirement for the position. That figure was slightly less for distant learners. 81% of the South Carolina distant learners now hold professional level positions, 75% of which required the MLIS degree. Among distant education cohort participants, 82% have secured professional positions, yet only 52% of those positions required the MLIS degree as a hiring qualification. It would appear that providing the MLIS degree is not the only role of the library school. Faculty and staff also must serve as advocates for the value of the degree to the profession. Graduates of USC's MLIS program frequently keep in touch with the College during their job searches, and their stories suggest that states without accredited programs of library and information science accept the shortage of degreed librarians as an unfortunate reality. The data shown in Charts 5 and 6 illustrate this information. Involvement in the Profession Distant education cohort participants show the highest levels of involvement in both state and national professional associations. When compared to the South Carolina distant learners and the traditional students, distant education cohort participants are most likely to accept committee appointments, most likely to serve as elected officers, and most likely to contribute to the literature of library and information science. The charts below illustrate the differences reported. Conclusion The information provided by recent graduates of the University of South Carolina's MLIS program confirms the common perception of the distant learner: white, female, over thirty, working mil-time, Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 27 taking classes part-time, involved with family and community responsibilities, and often experienced in library work. The majority of the distant learners who participated in this study could not have completed their degree programs without televised classes and were enthusiastic about the various communication and delivery media involved. 99% of the distant education cohort participants and 97% of the South Carolina distant learners said they would encourage others to take televised courses in the college. Traditional students who responded to this survey are quite another story. These students are predominately white, female, under forty, and either single or divorced. Their tendency was to attend school full- time and work part-time, often in a graduate assistantship that provided a stipend and reduced tuition. Although many of the traditional group enrolled in at least one televised course, their comments indicate that their purpose in doing so was to maximize their schedule options, not to experience distant education. Only 68% said they would recommend the televised courses. The distinction between traditional students and distant learners was particularly striking in the fifteen questions that required respondents to express an opinion. Traditional students preferred Columbia classes to televised classes in every one of the question scenarios included in this survey. More subtle differences surfaced among the two groups of distant learners. Distant education cohort participants found the effectiveness of their instructors' class presentations to be higher in televised courses than in Columbia courses, and they also expressed a higher level of personal commitment to their televised courses. Distant education cohort participants also rated televised courses preferable to Columbia courses in the following survey areas related to personal contact: interaction with instructors; interaction with fellow students; the number of students with whom they were well acquainted; involvement in peer support groups; participation in class- related discussion with fellow students; and achievement of a sense of class unity. As did their counterparts in other states, South Carolina's distant learners found the faculty's televised class presentations more effective than those classes held on campus. They reported a higher level of personal commitment to televised courses. In the realm of personal contact, South Carolina distant learners revealed that they had more student acquaintances, more peer support, and more frequent class-related discussions in televised classes. A troublesome trend in this data appeared in the questions related to asking questions and participating in class discussions in televised classes. All of the respondents to this survey reported that they were more comfortable in this area in Columbia classes than in televised classes. Students must be encouraged to become more actively involved in classroom discussions regardless of the medium. Class listservs have become important supplemental tools in the learning environment of the college, with listserv involvement mandatory in some courses. Faculty comments indicate that students are generally less reticent on listservs than they are in other situations. It would be interesting to study a correlation of students' patterns of class participation with their patterns of listserv participation. The quantitative results of this study will be integrated with previous course evaluation and program approval data into the college's continuous planning and assessment efforts. Knowledge of the traits that distinguish traditional students, South Carolina distant learners, and cohort members will assist the faculty in areas such as advisement, course planning, and the management of communications media. Knowledge of their enrollment patterns will impart a new focus to the scheduling process. Knowledge of their early careers may suggest refinement of the placement services available in the college. The demographic profile of each group will be Winter 2002
28 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Chart 3 Work in Area of Service Upon Which MLIS Program Focused Chart 4 Work in Type of Library Upon Which MLIS Program Focused important to those participating in recruitment efforts, admission decisions, and socialization efforts. This study suggests that while there are differences in the MLIS program experiences of recent graduates, the differences may be attributed somewhat more to the make-up of each group than to the program itself. Distant education cohort participants, South Carolina distant learners, and students considered "traditional" come into the program at different stages of their lives and with different levels of experience. Their expectations of the program and their ability to adapt to changing technology are different. These differences must be considered as this study continues with qualitative analysis of survey comments and continued tracking of the careers of survey respondent. Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 29 Chart 5 Comparison of Present Employment Status Chart 6 Relationship of Professional Position and MLIS Degree Winter 2002
30 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Chart 7 Percentage of Respondents with Membership in LIS-Related Associations Chart 8 Percentage of Respondents with Service to LIS-Related Association(s) Volume 43, Number 1
Speaking Out 31 Chart 9 Percentage of Respondents Who Have Secured Grant Funding for Their Libraries Chart 10 Percentage of Respondents Who Have Contributed to the Literature of LIS Winter 2002