THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES R. B. ARRAGON AQUARTER-century of membership in a college-library committee has given me, as a layman coming before a conference of professionals, some assurance and much caution. I have been close to problems of book budget and de- partmental allocation, of reserve books, documents, shelving, staffing, and of the blueprint for a library wing, at least close enough to recognize their complexity and to respect the difficulties of those who have to deal with them day after day, year in and year out. I am hesitant, therefore, about putting my topic in the form of "'What are we college professors now asking of the college library?" sus- pecting that perhaps it had better be "NVhat opportunities do the curriculum and the extra-curricular interests of stu- dents now offer to libraries?" May we on either side of the professional line try to answer both questions at once? Changing collegiate objectives or at least changing methods of achieving these have given or offered the library an increasingly strategic place in the educa- tion of the undergraduate. This has not been primarily because of the develop- ment of programs in general education, with their aim to provide a broad and common intellectual experience at the college level (or earlier), but rather be- cause of the efforts to engage students ac- tively in learning for themselves. Lec- tures, textbooks, and examinations have been supplemented and, though seldom entirely replaced, have been in many cur- riculums overshadowed by methods of challenging students to take a large share in their education. If in the natural sci- ences this has long been sought in the laboratories (when not reduced to rou- tine), in the humanities and social sci- ences it has more recently been encour- aged by transforming recitation or quiz section into group discussion. Discussion requires something to be discussed, some- thing which students can try to under- stand for themselves, raise questions and hazard answers about, and point to as evidence for or against these answers. What serves on the group-conference table as an object of discussion can often be equally the object of individual inter- pretation in essays or reports. Usually this object is a book or part of a book (other 1)ossibilities will be referred to later), not one that needs only be memorized (like many textbooks) but one that calls for imagination and in- quiry-a poem, drama, or novel, a his- tory, an essay in criticism or in philoso- phy, a treatise in one of the social sci- ences. When the purpose is the cultiva- tion of sensitivity and reflection, of anal- ysis and judgment, rather than the in- culcation of information and ready-made conclusions, the teacher and student can -indeed, must-cut through the devices that protect them from thought and emotion and have recourse to books that encourage them to think and to feel for themselves. They go to the sources, pri- mary and secondary, where they may encounter originality in ideas and in ex- pression. The return to the sources is par- 284
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 285 ticularly noticeable in the humanities, for original written works are among their characteristic objects of study. Generali- zations as formulas for the understanding of life or of art are not their aim, or at least their primary aim, nor is it the classification and summary of writers and writings. These staples of textbooks, when useful, are so as helps for approach- ing the works, not as substitutes for them. Introductory and other essays by sensitive and critical scholars, essays which are themselves objects worthy of humanistic study, will contribute more than will outlines and commonplaces. The aim of the humanities is the engage- ment of the feeling and thought of the student in the written (or other) word before him. It is upon this that his appre- ciation and understanding are focused and through this that they are devel- oped. The humanistic emphasis upon read- ing and interpretation applies not only to works of poetic and prose fiction and of literary criticism but to histories and to all written evidences, both 'literary and documentary, of particular events, per- sons, and situations in the past. It ap- plies to the works of a philosopher, to the exposition of a theory in the natural sci- ences, and to an essay or systematic trea- tise in the social sciences. All these may be studied for themselves as humanistic events, that is, as particular expressions of men's thought. Emphasis upon the use of books other than textbooks is not con- fined, however, to the humanities. Phi- losophy and the social sciences as fields that aim at generalization and system- building can challenge their students to imaginative and critical inquiry by con- fronting them with examples of such in- quiry. Here, as in the humanities, it is by analysis and interpretation of particular creations of human thought that the stu- dent in group discussion and in writing essays and reports under guidance edu- cates himself. No longer dependent upon a handy manual which, with some lecture notes, will assure passing examinations and get- ting a grade in a course, the student must have access to a wide variety of printed materials. The number and range of these may be illustrated, in an extreme but not untypical form, from the human- ities course at Reed College. The poetic works used in this two-year program in- clude epics as diverse as the Odyssey, Lucretius' On the Nature of Things, the Song of Roland and the Divine Comedy, a romance of Chretien de Troyes, some of the Canterbury Tales, and lyrics ranging from the seventeenth century to the twentieth. Dramatic poetry from the Greeks to Goethe has an important part. The novel is introduced (or anticipated) with Don Quixote and is a major concern from Stendhal to Kafka. Philosophy, es- pecially as political, social, and ethical theory, has representatives from Plato to Dewey. Specifically Christian writing is drawn from the New Testament, Augus- tine, Thomas Aquinas, Luther, Pascal, and others. The works of Herodotus and Thucydides are matched by those of modern historians. These, which offer the background of institutional history for the major phases of Western society, are varied. Special volumes and chapters, wherever possible those of thoughtful specialists, are preferred to chronological surveys. The range is not so wide in most pro- grams in the humanities and the social sciences, but the practice is often similar and is becoming increasingly so, espe- cially in the introductory and general courses. The resulting problem for the student of getting hold of so many and diverse works is serious. He can scarcely
286 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY be expected to buy all or a large propor- tion of them. A common solution is to find or to put the materials into a volume or two. Anthologies published for the general reader as well as for the student are likely to contain whole works and, in consequence, to be limited to special kinds or periods of literature. Discursive subject matter, such as political theory and art criticism, can rarely be repre- sented in anthologies with complete trea- tises, but long and continuous sections from a few authors may serve well. The inclusion of selections from many works necessarily cuts down the excerpts from each work to the point where they are likely to illustrate what the editor wanted them to say rather than how the author developed his thought. Continu- ity is better than spotty coverage; a full chapter than paragraphs from several chapters; a sequence of chapters than isolated ones. Much depends, of course, on the nature of the work. Poetry is difficult to cut, even in the case of epics, though there may be sec- tions that have enough structural dis- tinctness to be usable alone, with the aid of lectures or introductions suggesting their place in the whole. The Divine Com- edy is at least a debatable example. Lyric poetry and drama are denatured by cut- ting. Novels sometimes may be reduced without too much loss (witness Putnam's editing of the portable Cervantes), but not to the extent required for antholo- gies. Short stories would be better for this purpose. Histories lose much if read in short sections, unless we want only speeches from Thucydides or tales from Herodotus. For modem historians, the alternative of selecting short historical articles from journals or of commission- ing special essays for a collaborative vol- ume has not yet proved a definite suc- cess, at least in our experience. Docu- ments (charters, laws, letters, etc.) can be anthologized, though cutting is a deli- cate matter. It may, as with other kinds of materials, doctor the evidence. A similar distortion may result from an introduction to the excerpts chosen from any author. More frequent and therefore more serious is the hindrance to the student's reading of the passages for himself that may result from telling him in advance what he is to find. He often needs some background, but how defi- nitely directive should it be? Recent col- lections of documents have been organ- ized so that the materials could be used to throw light on particular historical and theoretical problems and even to an- swer specific questions posed by the edi- tors. Such organization provides a uni- fying frame of reference that sharpens and narrows the students' interpretation of diverse selections. Like laboratory ex- periments and mathematical problems, it trains in certain skills of analysis and has its place along With other methods of handling original materials; but it may, especially outtside the purely documen- tary field, so limit self-directed and open- minded exploration as to do more harm than good. Indication of relevant points of view or of alternative and controver- sial meanings may, on occasion, encour- age a student to vary or to enlarge his own perspective. When we want to do more than to train specific skills, the in- dication of a documentary problem, like the introduction to selections from lit- erary, historical, or philosophical works, should be suggestive rather than pre- scriptive, opening up rather than fore- closing the issues. Anthologies, at their best usable for specific purposes, do not solve the gen- eral problem. Even if a course staff can make its own collection (and what staff can be satisfied with that of some other
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 287 college?) and has a wide margin of toler- ance as to length of fragments, an anthol- ogy cannot be inclusive enough. Works that are to be read in full will bulk too large, and others will be too few (for an extensive course) or too scantily repre- sented. Attractive translations will be protected by copyright. Moreover, even one's own anthology constrains the flexi- bility of the program, inhibiting the in- novative enthusiasm of a teacher or a staff for fresh and more fruitful materi- als. Anthologies of various sorts may be used to supplement one another and to supplement the use of separate volumes containing one or a few closely related complete works, upon which, as far as possible, reliance should be placed. These are, to my mind, the best solution, one that has become more practical with the multiplication of series (several of them inexpensive) of literary, historical, and philosophical classics and of contem- porary writings in the same and related fields. They are a boon to the teacher and the student and to the college library. For the library has been and is likely to continue to be primarily responsible for providing the duplicates necessary in courses that do not rely on textbooks and anthologies and seek to take the student to original works in as close to the origi- nal form as possible. The duplicate re- serve collection is older than programs m general education, even older than the attention, begun about thirty-five years ago, to "great books" (any required or attractive course that strayed occasion- ally beyond a textbook or two in its as- signments needed a reserve); but the popularity of the use of primary mate- rials, combined with the movement for general education, has forced the exten- sion of the number of these collections and their expansion in size and scope. I wonder, however, whether even now they are adequate to the needs, actual and po- tential. In so far as they are not so, the reasons are obvious. The difficulties are probably at bottom largely financial. One to four or five is certainly not high for the ratio of copies to students, even when many members of the class buy a considerable proportion of the works assigned. The ratio might advantageously be made better than that for a book that alone comprises the reading for a single week. To spend any part of limited book budgets on dupli- cate copies when it might go toward in- creasing the new resources of the library seems well-nigh criminal to librarians and professors alike, and I share this feel- ing. Special funds are preferable, either granted from tuition receipts or (what comes to the same) an over-all book fee charged to each student, perhaps as part of a broader incidental fee covering labo- ratory materials as well. Rental, with private purchase as an alternative for the student, will also cover costs in several years, but seems of doubtful practicabil- ity except for a few volumes to be read steadily over a number of weeks or months and to be kept on the assignment lists until paid for. A collection does not have to be bought all at once, but it should never be considered as completed. Funds must be available for continued experimentation with new books, to fill gaps, to replace unsuccessful readings, to put in better translations, better edi- tions, and more up-to-date secondary works, and, in general, to effect changes in the pattern and emphasis of the course. The available reading must not be frozen, if the course and its staff are to stay alive. Book purchase, as I need not tell you, is only the beginning of the problems. The cost of cataloging and of removal may be kept down by accessioning only
288 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY one copy of each book. More important is shelf room both for the changing active reserve and for the far larger duplicate reserve pool. The duplicate collection at Reed (a college of about six hundred) numbers over 10,000 books, or 10 per cent of a total book collection (exclusive of public documents) of just over 100,000. Even a lower percentage will cause difficulties, in view of the normal slightness of the unused margin of shelf space for expansion, and of the continual and, it seems to me, inevitable increase in the regular collections. Space for books is expensive, and the competition for it keen. More serious still is the staff time required for the servicing of the duplicate reserves. The assignment of different works every week or fortnight means the continual rotation of books on the active reserve shelves and would, I should sup- pose, complicate the rental as much as, if not more than, it does the overnight loan system. Unless rented, copies must be available for continuous use during the day, both for individual students and for group conferences; many of them will be charged out in the late afternoon, others kept for the evening (perhaps in special desk-reserve) and charged out at closing time; all must be checked in again in the morning. The cost of staff for reserve circulation can be kept to a minimum by student self-service in checking out books from open reserve shelves. There will be some misuse of the privilege (the amount vary- ing with local habits and student self- governing morale) and the irrecoverable loss of a few copies each year. The cost of staffing closed active reserve shelves (and thereby probably also the inactive re- serves) is, however, in our experience far greater than that of replacing the losses. The size of our problem at Reed can be suggested by the overnight reserve cir- culation of 50,000 volumes for the aca- demic year of nine months (1953-54), ex- cluding daytime use and the use of the departmental libraries of the natural sci- ences (the latter an important item in a college having a high proportion of nat- ural-science majors), for both of which we have no figures. The overnight reserve circulation in the humanities and social sciences averaged about 300 per week- night and over 80 per student throughout the year. The intensity of use may be il- lustrated by the result of a brief study of the signatures on the cards of sample re- serve books in a relatively large Sopho- more course. These covered daytime as well as overnight use. Ninety per cent of the class checked out practically all these books with regularity. This circulation and its problems are not confined to general courses and dup- licate copies. Advanced courses in the humanities and social sciences also are sending students to a variety of primary and secondary sources for class discus- sion, reports, and papers. The needs may include duplicate copies for some key works, such as philosophic treatises used for common interpretation around the discussion table, but often reach beyond these to standard, provocative, and re- cent special studies or monographs on the particular matters under consideration. Common problems rather than common reading unify the discussions, and all the participants may thereby get some ac- quaintance with many of the significant works in the field. Familiarity with them and comparative evaluation of them are greatly facilitated by the chance to handle and to sample all the books in use for the course. Accessible shelves again seem called for, and, indeed, not only for books temporarily withdrawn from the general collection for reserve but for that collection itself.
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 289 There are many technical factors in- volved in the problems of open stacks and open reserves that will occur to li- brarians more readily than to a layman- budgets, staff organization, pattern of li- brary space both for shelves and for read- ing, size of student body and of collec- tions, reshelving by staff rather than by students, and the like. Reserves may be open and not the stacks, or vice versa. A reserve reading-room may have open shelves, with a checkup on students leav- ing it as a practical compromise between freedom and security, though this goes against the grain of my educational prin- ciples. Special departmental rooms may be made available to the undergraduate majors or by special permission to under- graduates engaged in a reading or re- search project. Small colleges have, to my mind, a distinct advantage in the practicability of making their collections open to all students. The effectiveness of free use of the stacks and of the reserves can be heightened by tables and cubicles to facilitate browsing and study. Refer- ence advice can suggest where and how to find books on one's subject and what books and articles may possibly be help- ful, but not usually, I should think, ex- actly what to read. Special guidance is obviously needed in the location of mate- rials in public documents. Careful intro- duction of entering students is particu- larly important, introduction to the lay- out of the stacks and of the reserves as well as to the card catalog, circulation practices, and reference shelves. These services are in line with the general edu- cational policy of encouraging students from the beginning to know and to use good books. In spite of the difficulties and costs, the reason for having a college library is the furtherance of student self-education, and the college should recognize the rele- vant services as a necessary charge upon it for making possible the kind of educa- tion that it believes in and promises to offer. Undergraduates are no longer simply pupils, and the possibilities for intellectual initiative (which indeed should begin before college) should not be postponed to the graduate school or even to the Senior year. Before examining further the nature of the collection on the open shelves and the purchase policy that determines it, we should have in view another aspect of the contemporary trend in college programs. Beyond general education and the more specialized seminar-like advanced courses lies undergraduate research. Perhaps the most recent evidence of this concern is in the establishment of undergraduate grants in the "behavioral sciences" through the Social Science Research Council for the summer after the Junior year. Independent, or individual, reading done under supervision through private conferences and written reports might be added as a fourth category; but the rela- tionship of this practice to the service of the library is not different from that of the upper-class course, unless it is so focused on a particular problem that it becomes in effect a project in research. Research by the undergraduate, whether done for a serious paper in an advanced course, for a special project or reading course, for honors work or a Bachelor's thesis required of all graduates, is in- tended to further some of the same ends as class discussion based on challenging reading materials. In a more specialized and individual way it should encourage critically responsible inquiry and the ca- pacity through analysis to formulate and to support conclusions. It must neces- sarily relate to a particular topic, usually in a special departmental field and con- nected with a major program, but this
290 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY does not make it unsuitable for liberal education, unless it is done as a technical exercise that does not stretch the mind and give it the sense of discovery. In- quiry directed at a particular problem may be more liberalizing than an unim- aginative, though broader, course. Undergraduate research, however, re- inforces the demands made by the semi- nar type of advanced course in major fields upon the specialized resources of the college library. The standard works, good recent monographs, novel and fruit- ful interpretations, and scholarly editions of basic texts make essential contribu- tions to many a class and provide the necessary background also for the pur- suit of a problem in research. A few spe- cialized journals should be on hand for occasional articles and, more important, for book reviews and bibliographical sur- veys. The student should become at least familiar with what these are and how they can serve both in exploratory read- ing in a field and in specific inquiry. Thus far I can probably go without much question, in spite of the cost of a purchase policy that would insure even a modest approach to such an ideal. We may grant that we ought to try to achieve this, even when we fear that we cannot adequately do so. I have, how- ever, mentioned only secondary sources and basic original texts (literary, philo- sophical, historical, and other classics). Occasional supplement to the library's collection of these works may be made, when necessary for a particular project, such as a Senior thesis, by interlibrary loan or by special purchase. But what of primary materials other than the texts of classics? Do we need and can we afford, in the library of a small college, docu- ments, statistical data, letters, old news- papers and other sources that challenge the inquirer in a way that the comparison of secondary authorities, however useful this may be, cannot do? Students of liter- ature, philosophy, historiography, and social theory may, at the undergraduate level, find good, annotated texts suffi- cient for their projects; but inquiry into institutional history, economic behavior, political and sociological problems, and biography and related fields will be de- ficient in its value, even as a trial run, without opportunity to interpret at least a sample of firsthand data. Such an op- portunity cannot be offered in every part of every field; but perhaps the need can be met by the gradual purchase of some key materials in special areas. History sources, for example, might be collected for one or two English centuries, for a period in American diplomatic or con- stitutional history, for local or regional history. Care on the part of faculty and of library staff in planning and in watch- ing for opportune purchase of sets will make small funds accomplish much over a number of years in carrying out a modest program. For the social sciences, United States documents are a mine, and fortunate is the library that is a selective depository, even though this good fortune brings its problems-carefully planned selection, continuous checking of what is received against what is published, listing and fil- ing, search in aid of a student or of a faculty supervisor of a student project, and so on. I need not demonstrate that these tasks require at least one full-time, well-trained, and experienced librarian; as a member of a division of history and social science, I can assure you that in the service given to undergraduate re- search he is worth the cost. Microfilms and microcards will increasingly add to available research materials, though they, too, require special techniques, equtipment, and space for handling.
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 291 Books in foreign languages outside of the language departments offer a con- troversial issue for small undergraduate libraries, one that is probably more and more decided in the negative. The choice is in effect between a good work in Eng- lish and a good, perhaps a better, one in French or German (less usually in Ital- ian, Spanish, or Russian). The original may sometime be translated; but when will this be, and may the work not in some cases be vital now? Few students (and they may be becoming rarer) can, and fewer still will, read it. Some may note it on the shelf and wish that they could read it. I continue to think that the library and the faculty should do some- thing for the few, if only as a protest against our national monolinguality; but I suspect that we can do little more than set an occasional example of a principle. Only university libraries can make a rule of maintaining fully satisfactory collec- tions of significant secondary works (to say nothing of source materials) in mod- ern European languages, at least outside their literatures. In the maintenance of a good collec- tion, faculty members are likely to have themselves as well as the students in mind, as, for instance, in the purchase of books in foreign languages, if they are not also afflicted by inability to read them. Self-interest is a danger when it is narrowed to a specialty; but, if the fac- ulty know and like worth-while books and have broad interests, they may be ordering to help both themselves and the students to keep abreast of what is being done in the variety of fields that they may touch in departmental and inter- departmental courses in a small college. The steady and wide use of imagina- tive and thought-provoking books as in- struments of education should, we hope, direct the interest of undergraduates be- yond the completion of the assignment. If curricular and library services encour- age firsthand acquaintance with creative and scholarly works through group dis- cussion and individual inquiry and through open shelves and convenient ar- rangements for reading in and out of the library, we should anticipate, if we are doing these things well, not only an in- crease in ability to read perceptively, im- aginatively, and discriminatingly but also curiosity, enjoyment, and excite- ment in reading and in having books to read. Concrete evidence of habits of read- ing and of book purchase derived from such instruction rather than simply from textbooks and anthologies of fragmen- tary source materials and from lectures and examinations are hard for me to come by. I can make only a suggestion or two. A college bookstore may be a barome- ter of the amount and character of stu- dent purchase. Thus, at Reed, a student body of 600 (of which about 230 are Freshmen) bought this spring 125 port- able Cervantes when this was put on the reading list for the course in Freshman humanities. The student purchase was in the face of the library purchase of fifty copies, but was apparently as much be- cause of, as in spite of, the duplicate re- serve. Upper-classmen and Freshmen de- cided that they wanted their own copies of an attractive book. It could not, in- deed, as I have already said, have been put on the required list for so general and inclusive a course without library provi- sion. From many years' experience we have concluded that library service does not dissuade students from building up their own libraries. The reverse is the case in courses in which the student is not re- quired to buy books. The sale of literary, philosophical, and historical classics is large and steady. It is highest for Fresh-
292 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY men and Seniors. The score of the latter, who buy more books than does any other class, and that of Juniors, too, is en- hanced by standard scholarly works and up-to-date monographs. This happy situ- ation would not be possible without the enterprise of the manager of the book- store, but his enterprise is in the way he takes advantage of the emphasis of the curriculum and collaborates in purchas- ing for the library as well as for the store. How much students borrow from the library for other than course reading I do not know. The 20,000 volumes taken by 600 students each year in the regular four-week circulation (exclusive of the natural-science libraries) is probably in considerable part connected with courses and research projects, though a wide variety of books from the general collec- tion is reserved from time to time for the use of advanced courses. There are signs, however, that, in spite of the pressure of assigned reading, students are attracted by the open shelves to look for other books, to become familiar with the re- sources of the library in various fields, and to charge out some of the books they find. Do curricular and extra-curricular reading habits continue after college? A study made by the Reed librarian nearly a quarter of a century ago (when present methods were in use at the college, though not perhaps so intensively as now) suggests a favorable response.' I wish that I had a more recent one for the college and had been able to search for comparable studies made for other insti- tutions. Fifty per cent of the graduates responded to the questionnaire, not quite equally divided between men and wom- en, with an average (including some non- readers) of over ten hours per week of book reading for both professional and personal interests. Others can perhaps supply more convincing figures. The test would, of course, not be just how many and what books college graduates read but how they read these books and news- papers and periodicals as well, without our forgetting the results that ought to appear in how they think and feel and on what they base their interests and attitudes. My discussion of the library's provi- sion of books for curricular purposes has alluded to policies and facilities for their use, in particular in regard to access to and circulation of reserves and books in the main collection. I have assumed gen- eral or special reading-rooms ample for the daytime pressure and the possibility of relief by a one- or two-hour checkout for use outside the library before the time for overnight withdrawal. I have empha- sized open shelves and suggested the pros and cons of self-help. Research also needs to be thought of in terms of convenience. Key sources for an individual project have to be kept together for several weeks or months, and related materials as well as dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference tools should be easily acces- sible. Desks in the stacks and rooms set aside for research, such as a Senior thesis room, are normal answers, though some- times forgotten in the planning of small libraries. Devices for encouragement of extra- curricular reading also have been com- mon. Browsing-rooms with shelves of standard and recent literature or lounge- like comfort in a wing of a regular read- ing-room and strategically placed shelves for new accessions or for a rental collec- tion of contemporary fiction, drama, po- etry, and essays are examples that come readily to mind. Conveniently placed shelves or stands for current journals or I Nell Unger, "Reading Interests and Habits of Reed College Alumni," Reed College Bidletin, Vol. X, No. 1 (January, 1931).
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 293 attractive and accessible periodical rooms may also further casual reading and the pursuit of special interests. Other meth- ods as well are being tried on the initia- tive of librarians to lure undergraduates away from course assignments but not from books, a diversion to be applauded if it is effective in moderation. Whether it has been too successful or not success- ful enough and by what measure we should judge, I cannot say. What more encouragement than facili- ties for getting books into the hands of students can libraries and librarians of- fer? Can they do anything on their own initiative to assist or to stimulate the faculty to make the library the center of study and of educational resources, at least in the humanities and social sci- ences? (I am not in a position to resolve the problem presented in the natural sci- ences by the power of laboratories to draw books away from the central library into special libraries.) Librarians surely can collaborate with teachers in improv- ing the book collections. They can make suggestions of purchases that will give better balance between areas in a field or will further departmental long-range plans for source materials or standard sets. They can call attention to new edi- tions and translations and to new jour- nals. To encourage the making of plans and to take some initiative in carrying them out may often be a delicate matter. It may take even greater tact to try to move a faculty and curriculum toward more reliance on the library and less on textbooks. The college librarian has more immediate acquaintance with the stu- dents' use of the collections than have most of the faculty members; but of greater importance for his influence is the rapport that he has established through his work with the faculty library com- mittee and with individual teachers. He is clearly in a stronger position if he is a member of the faculty and of faculty committees (as seems desirable) and stronger still if he does some teaching. In any case, with readiness to take advan- tage of local curricular studies and revi- sions, which have become numerous, li- brarians may be able to bore from within. I have been speaking of books, the staple of libraries. More than books may, however, be expected of libraries. Now that programs in the history and inter- pretative analysis of art and music have become common, attention is given to provision for the firsthand acquaintance of students with works of the visual arts and of music. Libraries and art and music departments are natural alternatives and perhaps rivals for this responsibility. "Firsthand acquaintance" may be considered euphemistic in two senses. Many students bring to the study of aesthetic objects little, if any, direct ex- perience with the materials and tools of artistic creation; but this problem is scarcely one for the libraries. Closer to their concern is the normal need of sub- stitutes for the originals either as visual objects or as performances. Modern tech- nology has provided increasingly effec- tive means of reproduction convenient for demonstration in lectures and for study by student groups and by individ- uals. After steel engravings came photo- graphs and slides in black and white, and after these have come color prints and color slides. The last step is not recog- nized by all art historians as an advance; but, in spite of the vagaries of color re- productions, it seems to me that they awaken in the student at least an aware- ness that the qualities of painting are not limited to linear design and the plasticity of light and shadow. In music there is not the same degree of doubt that phono- graph records are an improvement over
294 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the rolls for player pianos and that re- cording has improved. Whether or not everyone is agreed that long-playing rec- ords are more convenient for detailed analysis in class than the 78's, we shall evidently soon have to rely entirely on them, with the important exception that tape recording is developing as a com- petitor for certain teaching purposes. Teachers and librarians are not likely to overlook the place that recording has al- ready taken also for presenting drama and poetry. Collections of reproductions are not in themselves enough. Records need ma- chines for playing them and scores and reference books for consultation. The presence of scores suggests the usefulness of a piano for some students. Histories of art, critical studies, and other works of reference are normally the accompani- ments of a collection of photographs and prints in the visual arts, and I can im- agine the value of a small projector and screen for more than lecture purposes. These facilities obviously call for special music and art rooms. The problem of where these rooms should be located and under whose con- trol arises from the several ends that they may have to serve in a small college. Students concentrating in the fine arts or in music will be constant users of the re- productions and of the reproducing ma- chines, as will also the faculty of these de- partments. This active concern will at- tract the collections and equipment and at least some of the books to the depart- mental building or rooms. Students in nonspecialist courses in the liberal arts or general education program (including humanities courses) will be best served by central location and broad handling of the resources in art and music. Equally important are the interests of those who wish to study and to enjoy paintings and music out of course. To serve them may seem at times to conflict with the con- venience of both general and special courses and to warrant college supervi- sion through the library. These various services should be viewed as supplementary rather than competitive, and the same view applies to the alternat'ives of departmental and library provision and management. At- tribution of responsibility to one or the other or to both would depend on the capacities and attitudes of the respective staffs, the available room space and the chances for increasing it, the convenience of location for the college as a whole, and the traditional strength and degree of success of the existing arrangement. The college is fortunate that has a library building of the size and plan that enable it to provide music and art rooms. The latter are, I suppose, more frequently housed there than are the former, for acoustical, if not for other, reasons; but it would seem wise in any case for the library to have some responsibility and supervision over what have become com- mon resources for college education. For circulation of art and music mate- rials among students for private appreci- ation and study, the library appears to have definite advantage. It is better equipped than the average small depart- ment for charging out color prints, rec- ords, and scores. Framed color prints loaned by the term have proved popular at some institutions. A small rental charge has enabled us at Reed to pur- chase and to frame a growing collection. The long-playing record offers a similar opportunity, perhaps on a subscription basis, for revolving short loans when, as with prints, regular funds cannot be spared for additions and replacement.
THE LIBRARY AND COLLEGIATE OBJECTIVES 295 The library is to be viewed as a store- house of men's work of the past and the present or rather of the various records of that work. This includes creation in stone and in steel, in pigment and in clay, in tone and in rhythm, as well as in words in the books with which this paper has been largely concerned. To help to make all these available is the challenge to the college library offered by the broadening scope of college programs and at the same time by the endeavor to focus the atten- tion of the student upon the original sources, artistic, scholarly, and docu- mentary. From these, it is hoped, the student may draw not simply some knowledge of human experience but practice in those sensitive, imagina- tive, and rational skills through which he may inquire into and interpret what men have said and done and what they con- tinue to say and do.