The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism and Professional Education for Librarianship Suzanne M. Stauffer Louisiana State University. Email: stauffer@lsu.edu The leaders of the library profession in the United States in the 19th century were white, middle-class, college-educated men. They attempted to construct librarianship in the United States as an equivalent profession to the other white, masculine professions of their day. They also created education for librarianship in the same mold. They sub- scribed to, and employed, the traditional white Western masculine definition of profes- sion as one of expertise derived from education based on science. They also employed the control of knowledge and its application as exemplified by the type of professional education they promoted. Their efforts were not restricted to education but also includ- ed active discrimination against female librarians in the Library War Service during the First World War. This paper presents a new perspective on the meaning of “profession” which recognizes it as situated at the intersection of gender, race, and nationality and explores the implications for modern education for librarianship. Keywords: librarianship, LIS education, professionalization, gender, race, library war service, history of librarianship Introduction It will establish that they constructed edu- cation for librarianship according to this Those writing about the history of edu- model in order to re-create it as a mascu-cation for, and professionalization of, line profession. They imposed this white librarianship in the United States have middle-class construction on black librar- produced primarily descriptive works that ians as well. It will also show that their document the events and individuals in- efforts to masculinize the profession were volved. This critique however, does not not restricted to education but included ac- question the traditional definitions of pro- tive discrimination against female librar- fession, and so offers little insight into the ians in the Library War Service during the social and cultural forces that influenced First World War. Because the male and fe- the structure and form of education for male librarians of the time were all white the LIS profession that gained acceptance and middle-class and because they were (Stauffer, 2015). The historical study doc- nearly all native-born Americans, race, umented in this paper will demonstrate class and ethnicity are held constant, thus that the early leaders of librarianship sub- it is possible to focus solely on the intersec- scribed to, and employed, the traditional tion between profession and gender. This white Western masculine definition of pro- does not mean that race, class and ethnic- fession as one of expertise derived from ity were not factors, but rather that librari- education based on science. They also anship as a gendered profession developed employed the control of knowledge and within the greater context of middle-class its application as exemplified by the type whiteness in the United States. of professional education they promoted. Most importantly, it will apply the J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 4—(Fall) October 2016 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education 311 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/4/5
312 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE most current theory of the professions as wielding of power or expertise (Stauffer, a process of identity formation. This is in 2014). contrast to it being seen as a collection of Library historians have documented the traits, or the wielding of power or exper- feminization of the profession, and femi- tise, to the social construction of the devel- nist scholars are contributing to a more opment of education for, and the profes- inclusive library history which examines sionalization of, librarianship. The paper the role that women have played (Eddy, will explore the implications of this theory 2001; Garrison, 1979; Grotzinger, 1994; for our understanding of librarianship as a Harris, 1992; Hildenbrand, 1992, 1996, profession today and the appropriate form 2000; Maack, 1994, 1997; Passet, 1994; or forms of education for such a profession. Wiegand, 1986a, 1989). However, few have explored the development of librari- Definitions of Profession anship and of education for librarianship from the modern perspective of profession It has been established that the tradi- as the intersection of race, ethnicity, and tional Western definitions of “profession” gender (for a more detailed discussion, see ultimately derive from the “successful Stauffer, 2014). While Honma (2005) ef- professional projects of class-privileged fectively explores the foundations of the male actors at a particular point in history” American public library and demonstrates (Witz, 1990, p. 675), that is, of middle- persuasively that those “libraries have his- class white men in the Victorian Age in the torically served the interests of a white ra- United States and Great Britain. These tra- cial project by aiding the construction and ditional definitions also assume that “the maintenance of a white American citizenry work of professionals, however differently as well as the perpetuation of white privi- understood, transcends traditional or pri- lege in the structures of the field itself” (p. mordial categories such as race, ethnicity 5), he fails to extend his critical analysis to or gender” (Adams, Clemens & Orloff, an explicit consideration of the definition 2005, p. 33) rather than being embedded in and form of the concept of “profession” it- and mediated through the Western white self. Work on the history of education for male power structure. These construc- African-American librarians uncritically tions reflect and privilege white Western accepts the white, middle-class masculine middle-class cultural masculine ideals definition of profession and places Afri- while repressing, denigrating or denying can-American librarianship within that the cultural values of other races, genders, framework (DuMont, 1986; Shiflett, 1994; classes and ethnicities. At the core of this Martin & Shiflett, 1996). construction is expertise derived from for- Research on the history of education for mal education based on science and the librarianship in countries other than the control of knowledge and its application United States reveals a strong influence of (Lo, 2005; Witz, 1990). Current theories the white Western European model of the of the professions, however, recognize professions in Eastern and South Africa that the conceptual category of profession (Dyab, 2002), Australia (Wilson, Kennan, can only be defined contextually, that the Willard, & Boell, 2010), Britain (Grogan, traits and structures that characterize pro- 2007), Canada (Boone, 2003), Ethiopia fessions at any given time are not discrete, (Gupta, 1993), Russia (Richardson, 2000), universal or enduring, and that they exist and India (Kumar, 2010; Raghavan, 2005; within an extended web of institutional re- Thakur, 2004; Walia, 2010) where library lationships formed by the intersection of education was established by an English- the professions, the market and the state. man, John MacFarlane and two American They are a process of identity formation librarians, William Alanson Borden and rather than a collection of traits or the Asa Don Dickinson (Kumar, 2010). Mo-
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 313 niarou-Papaconstantinou, & Tsatsaroni structing resembled other professions at (2008) explore the history of education for the time, with its professional association librarianship in Greece “using a sociologi- and declaration of professional rights and cal point of view to attempt to understand responsibilities, emphasis on specialized its place in the field of higher education knowledge and skills, and the necessity of today” (p. 85) while they unquestioningly maintaining standards in order to preserve accept the traditional white Western mas- their status and prestige. After forming the culine definition of the concept of profes- ALA, their next project was to define and sion. Researchers writing about the histo- institute appropriate professional educa- ry of education for librarianship in China tion to transmit that specialized knowledge do not address the model or definition of and those specialized skills. The work of “profession” which provides the foun- other historians demonstrates that the de- dation for such education, although the velopment of librarianship in the United emphasis on a university education sug- Kingdom (Coleman, 2014; Freeman, gests that it is some form of the Western 1992, 1997; Grogan, 2007) and Canada European model (Zhou & Lin, 1990). Lin (Bruce 2012) followed a similar pattern, (1985) provides a brief glimpse into the as all three countries derived their defini- pre-Communist Revolution model of li- tion of “profession” from the same source. brarianship as a career for retired officials Grogan’s excellent comparative history of and unemployed scholars and the impact education for librarianship in the US and of the radical social and cultural changes UK demonstrates that, while the two coun- of the Revolution on librarianship and tries followed different paths historically, education for librarianship, but, again, the with the UK preferring certification of li- Western European model of “profession” brarians to accreditation of library schools, seems to be assumed. those paths were converging by the end of the 20th century (Grogan, 2007). Historical Background Prior to the opening of Melvil Dewey’s School of Library Economy at Columbia It has been well established that there University in 1887, training for librarian- was conflict over how to construct the new ship in the United States consisted of li- profession of librarianship and how to ed- brary-based apprenticeship programs and ucate its practitioners during the late 19th on-the-job training (Davis, 2005; Shera, and early 20th century in the United States 1972; see also Vann, 1961), as was the (Stauffer, 2015) and that library leaders norm for all of the professions at that time. themselves were ambivalent about the is- Even after the School of Library Economy sue. The men who organized the American and others had opened, a majority of pub- Library Association (ALA) in 1876 were lic library directors in this period preferred “white, Anglo-Saxon Protestant males to train their own employees in-house born in the Northeast, from families which rather than hire library school graduates had been living on the continent three gen- (Wiegand, 1986b; see also Vann, 1961). erations or more. Most were educated in Mary Wright Plummer, head of the Pratt northeastern schools and most were chief Institute library school in New York City, administrators of large libraries” (Wie- advocated university library schools and gand, 1986b, p. 12). In other words, they argued against the need for training “the were the epitome of the class-privileged born librarian” (Vann, 1961, p. 128). The male actors from whose activities the ear- ALA ad-hoc Committee on Standards ly theories of the professions derived and for Library Training reported that formal they attempted to construct librarianship training in a library school was preferable and education for librarianship in their and that experience and training on the own image. The profession they were con- job were perfectly adequate (Vann, 1961).
314 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Herbert H. Putnam (ALA president in 1897 (Dana 1900), although Fletcher denied un- and U.S. Librarian of Congress from 1899- equivocally that librarianship qualified as 1939) and John Cotton Dana (president such (Vann, 1961). Arthur E. Bostwick, of ALA 1895/96 and director of Newark ALA president 1907/08 and librarian in (New Jersey) Public Library) urged ALA New York City and later St. Louis, Mis- to establish educational or certification re- souri, opined that “library schools are try- quirements (Vann, 1961), while William ing to do for librarianship what the law Fletcher (ALA president 1891/92) and his- school does for the legal profession, West torian Ruben Gold Thwaites (president of Point for the army, the normal school ALA 1899/1900) opposed library school for the teacher, or the theological school training entirely, claiming that it was be- for the ministry.” [He emphasized that] neath the dignity of “the men [known] “school instruction . . . needs to be supple- foremost as bibliographers and scholarly mented by practical work” (Vann, 1961, librarians” (Vann, 1961, p. 87). Hiller C. p. 137-8) because members of the estab- Wellman, ALA president 1914/15 and li- lished professions all completed some brarian of the Springfield (Massachusetts) form of internship after graduation, and, City Library, argued that students needed as the first chair of the section on “Profes- less technical training and more instruc- sional Training for Librarianship,” set its tion in the “aims of the library, methods goal as accomplishing “for library educa- of advertising a library’s work, and other tion what Abraham Flexner’s committee administrative problems,” while Charles had done for medical education” in 1910 H. Gould of McGill University in Canada (Vann, 1961, p. 210). insisted that the purpose of library schools Much of the controversy revolved was specifically to teach the “technique around the appropriate professional educa- which is peculiar to library work”(Vann, tion and roles for men and for women. The 1961, p. 148). In the U.K., Henry R. Ted- curriculum and goals of Dewey’s school der, president of the Library Association in appealed primarily to white, middle-class 1897 and librarian of the Atheneum Club young women with some college educa- in London, declared that “It is impossible tion. Courses emphasized the utilitarian, to train librarians except in connection the pragmatic, and the practical. Students with a large library” (Grogan, 2007, p. 6). were expected to become skilled in the The gendered and implicit racial na- techniques of running a library rather than ture of the arguments is made obvious by knowledgeable about the principles of the frequent comparison of librarianship administration and policy. Later schools to the traditional masculine professions headed by graduates of his school repli- which were, at that time, dominated by cated his methods, with an emphasis on white males, if not actually closed to white apprenticeship, work assignments, and women and to men and women of color. practical experience (Shera, 1972; see also William H. Brett, head of the Amherst Vann, 1961). summer library school and ALA president Aksel G. S. Josephson, director of the 1896/97, proposed that librarianship fol- John Crerar Library at the University of low the example of the masculine legal Chicago, called for a “school of bibliog- profession by creating an examining board raphy and library science, affiliated with that would certify all those who claimed one of the great universities” (Vann, 1961, to be librarians (Vann, 1961), which was p. 81), in order to attract more men to the the traditional method of all the other pro- profession and thus improve the image fessions and preferred in Britain (Grogan, and status of librarianship. H. L. Elmen- 2007). Dana argued that educational and dorf, director of the St. Joseph, Missouri training programs would give librarianship Public Library, proposed that a one-year equal status with ‘the learned professions’ program in library administration and
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 315 policy be designed specifically for men struction of education for librarianship was (Vann, 1961), while Chalmers Hadley, the formation of the ALA Committee on ALA president 1919–1920 and director Library Training in 1903. The purpose of of the Denver (Colorado) Public Library, this committee was to evaluate education agreed that such a program would attract for librarianship and making recommenda- more men to the field, rather than courses tions about its future structure and content. that appealed “largely to the house-wife- The Committee consisted of the heads of ly instincts” (Vann, 1961, p. 149). Such five university-affiliated library schools : sexism was not restricted to the United Mary Wright Plummer of the Pratt Insti- States. When James Duff Brown, one of tute, Salome Cutler Fairchild of the New the first examiners of the British Library York State Library School, Katharine L. Association, visited Dewey’s school in Sharp of the University of Illinois, Alice 1893, he expressed his fervent hope that B. Kroeger of Dexel, and Mary E. Rob- the School’s “operations not in the course bins of the Simmons College. The Com- of time flood the universal globe and li- mittee evaluated the six kinds of library brarianship with a ‘monstrous regiment of training programs then in existence: (1) women’ which neither trumpet blasts nor one- and two-year programs from schools acts of legislature will ever keep in check” offering courses during the regular school (Grogan 2007, p. 7). year; (2) summer school or summer pro- The leaders of the ALA, nearly all mid- grams; (3) apprentice classes in libraries; dle-class, college-educated white males, (4) courses in bibliography and the history envisioned the construction of librarian- of printing offered by colleges; (5) normal ship as a traditional white Western mascu- schools offering courses in librarianship; line profession of equal status to the other (6) correspondence courses offered by white masculine professions. Entrance schools and by individuals (Vann, 1961, would be dependent upon formal train- pp. 107–108). None of the programs was ing in the academic discipline of “library evaluated on the quality of its graduates science” and accreditation or certification or on placement rates, nor were those who awarded by the professional organization. employed these graduates surveyed. They Professional roles would be those which were evaluated solely on their adherence were historically and culturally construct- to the Committee’s pre-determined stan- ed as appropriate for each gender. Wom- dards, which were the standards that they en’s training would be limited to the rou- had implemented in their own programs. tine, clerical, “house-wifely” tasks while The Committee itself acknowledged this men would be educated in administration, conflict of interest and bias, saying that it policy, library science, and the scholarly was “sensible that it might have been com- field of bibliography. Women would be the posed of persons less likely to be thought supporting players, providing the founda- prejudiced” (Vann, 1961, p. 107) tion upon which the men would build their The Committee privileged the first type reputation, their distinction, and their pro- as formal education in the academic dis- fession. This construction would become cipline of librarianship and paid scant at- the dominant, and ultimately sole, con- tention to the remainder. The nine existing struction of the profession and education summer programs were evaluated on the for it in the United States and would exert basis of only two standards: whether they a strong influence on education for librari- admitted only those working in libraries anship in the rest of the world. and whether they provided opportunities for practice work in small libraries. None Committee on Library Training of the programs met these standards. They all admitted students who were not work- One of the consequences of this con- ing in libraries without any standards for
316 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE admission, and none provided practice members were expected to have been edu- work (Vann, 1961). Although the Com- cated in the one of the established schools, mittee could not simply ignore the 33 students should have at least three years of existing apprenticeship programs (23 of college for admission to the program, were whom returned the questionnaires), rep- to be full-time, matriculated students in resenting as they did the majority of op- residence and were to be awarded a degree portunities for training as well as trained or a formal certificate from the institution,, librarians, it “expressed concern over the and an internship was a necessity (Vann, development of such programs” not due to 1961). The Committee singled out three the methods employed, but because of the programs for criticism: Syracuse, Colum- hypothetical damage to the profession by bia, and University of Chicago. All three a library that takes in persons not engaged were criticized for having too few faculty, in library work and not under appoint- and faculty without library school train- ment, without any test of their general ing, and for admitting students with fewer knowledge by examination, uses them for than three years of college. Columbia and its own needs only (requiring no fee from Chicago were also criticized for admitting them and hence not responsible for them) non-matriculated students who complet- and at the end of six months or so sends ed only part of the program. These were them out with a letter to seek positions in also the only three programs which were other libraries (Vann, 1961, p. 112). not represented on the Committee (Vann, The objection was not that there had 1961), which suggests a conflict of interest been complaints that apprenticeship pro- both in the evaluation itself as well as in grams were producing unqualified and the evaluation standards which were em- incompetent librarians, but that the ap- ployed. As a consequence, the University prenticeship programs did not follow the of Chicago program closed shortly after model of the university-based academic the release of the report (Stauffer 2015). programs of the masculine professions With the acceptance of this report, the which the ALA leadership had determined ALA also signaled its acceptance of the was the only acceptable form of educa- construction of librarianship as the equiva- tion for librarianship. Correspondence lent of a masculine profession and its priv- courses that were taught by individuals ileging of the construction of education for fared even worse, with the Committee librarianship as formal training based on expressing “grave concerns” because the science and the control of knowledge and courses were not taught under the regula- its application. This is especially evident tion and control of an “authoritative body” when comparing the two programs in the (Vann, 1961, p. 113) such as a university. state of Illinois—The University of Illinois Although the Committee established stan- Library School and the University of Chi- dards for apprentice and correspondence cago Course in Library Science (Stauffer courses in 1905 (Vann, 1961) , these pro- 2015). The University of Illinois Library grams were not included in any of the sub- School was designed in accordance with sequent evaluations, as the die had been the educational programs of the other ex- cast against them. tant professions. It was integrated into the The 1903 Committee evaluated nine university curriculum and had the full sup- schools in the first category (New York port of the administration as a legitimate State Library School, Pratt, Drexel, Uni- degree program (Vann, 1961). It met all versity of Illinois, Columbia, University of the criteria established by the mascu- of Chicago, Syracuse, Simmons, and the line professions: the head of the school, Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh) according Katharine Sharp, and all of the faculty to how well they emulated the educational were graduates of a library school; three programs of the male professions. Faculty years of college were required for admis-
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 317 sion to the program; a B.L.S. was awarded therefore, education for it, should be the on completion of the two-year program; equivalent of the other so-called ‘learned only full-time students were admitted; professions,’ all of which were masculine- 260 hours of practice work were required gendered. By 1924, they had formalized the first year and 330 the second (Vann, and institutionalized education through 1961); and bibliography was a key compo- a recognized college or university as the nent of curriculum (Vann, 1961). only acceptable form of education for li- The University of Chicago Course in brarianship with the creation of the Board Library Science was representative of the of Education for Librarianship (BOE) losing side of the conflict (Stauffer 2015). which issued the first minimum standards Although the head, Zella Allen Dixson, for library education programs in 1926 was a college graduate with multiple (Thomison, 1978). graduate degrees, all of her library train- ing was obtained through informal means, Education for African-American much of it through the trial-and-error of Librarians experience. The faculty included, at vari- ous times, Josephine Robertson, another In 1925, one year after its formation, University of Chicago librarian without the BOE, in cooperation with the Carn- formal academic education in librarian- egie Corporation of New York, the Gen- ship, Hervey Foster Mallory, head of the eral Education Board created by John D. University Home Study Department, and Rockefeller, and the Julius Rosenwald Mary E. Downey, a graduate of the pro- Fund, founded a school for the educa- gram who would go on to head the Chau- tion of African-American librarians at tauqua Institute summer library school the racially-segregated Hampton Institute from 1906–1936 (Stauffer 2005b). It was in Hampton, Virginia. The Institute was offered through University Extension, as founded in 1868, three years after the end a correspondence course, with a certifi- of the American Civil War, to educate Af- cate for completion not a degree, and was rican-Americans in agricultural and indus- at best application-oriented, at worst sim- trial vocations and trades. Its most famous ply vocational. It emphasized the “house- graduate was Booker T. Washington, who wifely” rather than the “learned” aspects of founded the Tuskegee Institute in Ala- librarianship. Rather ironically today, she bama in 1881 along the same principles was criticized for her outreach to working (DuMont 1986; Martin & Shiflett 1996). librarians who had no formal training, al- Although a full discussion of the history of lowing them to attend part-time or to take the education of African-American librar- only those courses which they found im- ians is beyond the bounds of this study, the mediately relevant, and teaching most few scholarly articles on the topic do al- of the classes in the evening and in off- low a discussion of the intersection of race campus locations (Stauffer, 2015). This in the construction of the profession and worked against the program in the eyes demonstrate that the white middle-class of the Committee, which at least leaned leadership of the ALA imposed its defini- in the direction of formalized education tion of the profession and of education for for librarianship in 1903, and was already that profession on the African-American concerned with improving the image and community. status of librarianship as a profession and The articles by DuMont (1986) and increasing the number of men it. While Martin & Shiflett (1996) lack a critical the Committee and ALA itself may have analysis of the social and cultural contexts been undecided about the exact form that in which these efforts were taking place education for librarianship should take in and fail to examine the intersection among 1903, they agreed that the profession and race, class, politics, and history. Although
318 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE they both note that the establishment of cussion or inquiry among many of those education for librarianship for African- most deeply interested . . . I refer to [white] Americans in the U.S. was dominated by librarians like myself . . . and to influential middle-class white men and funded by and progressive Negroes, the very people white corporations, and that the library it is proposed to serve.” Walter White, school at the Hampton Institute was found- assistant secretary of the National Asso- ed over the objections of the few African- ciation for the Advancement of Colored Americans in librarianship, neither seems People also wrote to Belden that “this pro- to be aware that what they are describing is posed school will not only not be approved white middle-class male hegemony. Both by thinking colored people, it will be vig- articles document that the Louisville Free orously opposed and resented” (Martin & Public Library had been providing formal Shiflett, 1996, pp. 305-306). The decision library education for black library work- to open the school at Atlanta University in ers under the direction of Thomas Foun- 1941 was, again, made by the white lead- tain Blue for nearly 20 years when the ership of ALA and over the objections of Hampton Institute school was opened, and black library leaders such as Wallace Van that the director of that program, George Jackson (DuMont,1986). Settle, “had approached ALA about the Martin and Shiflett, in a stunning dis- possibility of establishing some sort of of- play of tone-deafness, despite acknowl- ficial role in the training of Black library edging that “Hampton never enjoyed the workers” (Martin & Shiflett 1996, p. 301). widespread support from the Black com- Yet both proceed under the assumption munity, which felt that it perpetuated seg- that the only acceptable form of training is regation,” not only neglect to explore the in an academic institution. DuMont (1986) issue from the perspective of black librar- concludes that the Louisville Free Public ians and the black community, but, in fact, Library program reflected “the limited na- declare that it “is time to close the book ture of library service to blacks at the be- on the mystery of Hampton and move on ginning of the twentieth century” (p. 235), to other intriguing questions in the devel- as if the training itself were necessarily opment of libraries and librarianship” (p. inadequate, without any consideration of 322). the curriculum or the quality of the gradu- ates. Neither article reports on any efforts Library War Service and the by the BOE to determine what library ser- Masculinization of Librarianship vices the various African-American com- munities wanted, or needed, or how to best The efforts at masculinization of the train librarians to provide those services library profession did not end with estab- and meet those needs. lishing a masculine form of education, pri- From this research, it is clear that no one marily because it did not have the desired in the African-American library commu- effect of increasing the number of men nity had been included in the discussions in the profession. It remained a primarily of where African-Americans were to be female profession with a relatively few educated for librarianship, let alone how white men in administrative and leader- and for what purpose, and certainly no ship positions. ALA leaders looked for other members of the African-American other opportunities to attract men to the community had been consulted. Ernestine profession and found one in the Com- Rose, an advocate for service to African- mission on Training Camp Activities of Americans and head of the Harlem Branch the U.S. War Department, charged with of the New York Public Library, wrote to entertaining American troops training for ALA president Charles F. Belden that the deployment to the front in World War I. plans had been made without “open dis- The ALA Executive Board established the
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 319 preliminary Committee on Mobilization wrote in an appeal that “There is one need, and War Services on April 6, 1917, with persistent and recurring, for which there Herbert H. Putnam as chairman. It joined is by no means an adequate supply. The six other organizations—the Young Men’s work calls for men of tried executive abil- Christian Association (YMCA), the War ity, of maturity and experience to serve as Camp Community Service, the Knights of camp librarians.” She further character- Columbus, the Jewish Welfare Board, the ized it as “a national service” (Rathbone, Young Women’s Christian Association 1918, p. 4), taken on at the behest of the (YWCA), and the Salvation Army—in the War Department and, by implication, the Commission. The War Service Committee equivalent of active service in the military was created by ALA in June, 1917, to raise Male librarians saw it as “an opportu- funds for books and recruit trained librari- nity to demonstrate to the MEN of Amer- ans and shortly thereafter the ALA Library ica . . . that library work is a profession” War Service assumed responsibility for 35 (Personal note, 1917, p. 5), reflecting a vamp libraries (Young, 1981; Daniels, frustration among male librarians with 2008). They saw this as an opportunity to the lack of status and recognition of the improve the image and status of librari- profession. Librarian Frederick Goodell anship as a profession, and finally attract at Camp Wheeler, Georgia, argued that large numbers of men to it, as only men the “Camp Library should be as business- were permitted to serve as librarians in the like as the Ordnance Corps or the Quar- hyper-masculine environment of the mili- termaster’s Department” [and urged other tary camps. In the segregated military of camp librarians to] “guard against that fa- that day, there was no question that these vorite vice of librarians—fussiness” [and men would be white. not attempt to] “pass rules and fuss about The discourse surrounding this effort re- regulations,” [because] “In the camps we flected the earlier gendered division of la- must appeal to red-blooded he-readers or bor, with men sought for the roles of lead- close up shop . . . Let us not spoil it all by ers and administrators, while women were hanging May baskets on door knobs” [and relegated to supporting roles. In addition employing] “cute little tricks that hold the to encouraging male librarians to enter the Swamp Hollow Ladies’ Library Associa- Library War Service, the ALA asked for tion breathless . . . Let us pull together to the names of former male librarians as keep the cream puff school of library sci- well as the names of men without library ence out of the camps” (Goodell, 1918, p. experience, “men of real executive ability . 423), leaving no doubt as to his opinion . . men of common sense, of some dignity, about female librarians and their influence and men who are used to roughing it, who on the profession and on education for li- can stand strenuous work” (More work- brarianship. ers needed, 1918, p. 421), constructing The construction of the camp library as the positions as both mentally and physi- a male domain was enhanced by the fact cally rigorous, and demanding. The work that, at least initially, nearly all were es- was described as “arduous. Every person tablished by the Young Men’s Christian on the staff thus far has been a man who Association, located in YMCA. buildings, is willing and able not only to do library and administered jointly with the YMCA work, but also to handle 200-pound bags (Koch, 1918). Meanwhile, the YWCA of magazines and large boxes of books, to built and staffed Hostess Houses, where shovel coal and to drive and care for an service men could visit with wives and automobile. Most of these things women girlfriends in a “homelike atmosphere librarians could not do” (Putnam, 1918, p. complete with a surrogate mother figure” 9). Josephine A. Rathbone, then vice-di- (Daniels, 2008, p. 288), which included rector of the Pratt Institute Library School, small libraries of books for the use of the fe-
320 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE male visitors (Library War Service, 1918b). War Service 1918a, p. 19), while Putnam Women were alien others in the world of in particular advanced this gendered view the masculine military camp and permitted of the Library War Service and librarian- only in chaperoned, domestic settings. ship (he was likely the author of “War Ser- Not only did ALA actively recruit vice for Librarians” and other anonymous male librarians, it just as actively discour- articles on the topic), maintaining that aged female librarians from volunteering women were serving the war effort in all for service. At the same time that librar- of the traditional housewifely ways. “They ians nationally were being encouraged to are “in it” in the aggregate far more than cheerfully “spare your experienced [male] men. They were in it during the campaign assistants by training new apprentices, for funds, they are in it in every library even at the sacrifice of some of your less soliciting books, sifting them, preparing essential activities” (War Service for Li- them, forwarding them” (Putnam, 1918, brarians, 1918, p. 38) and Rathbone was p. 9). He called female librarians who ap- praising male librarians for serving as plied to work in the camps irresponsible camp librarians, saying “The bigger the and selfish, referring to “Children’s librar- man, the greater the opportunity seemed to ians anxious to get away from the job to go him; the more urgent, the more vital, the into filing work in the ordnance division. more rewarding” (Rathbone, 1918, p. 4), Think of it! A children’s librarian, in war women librarians in small towns were dis- time, willing—eager—to abandon such a couraged from applying even for positions work as that for the work of a file clerk! as assistants. “Remember there are others Believe me, I cannot name a man in war who may be able to fill these newer places time service in Washington who can do for [associated with war activity], those who the future of this country what the librar- are willing to give this service because it is ians of a children’s department can do at more attractive. But in each town there is this very moment” (ALA Bulletin, 1918, but one librarian, and few who are willing p. 287). or able to replace her . . . none of these in- Thus it can be seen that the view of the fluences for better living can be spared or leadership of ALA in this period was that allowed to deteriorate” (War Service for librarianship was, or ought to be, a gen- Librarians, 1918, p. 38). Such blatant dis- dered profession in the image of other criminatory language further promoted the gendered professions and that the Library gendered division between the red-blood- War Service would succeed where pro- ed, masculine world of the camp libraries, fessional education had failed. However and the feminine, cream-puff world of the their hopes were dashed. By 1918, ALA Swamp Hollow Ladies’ Library Associa- was encouraging camp librarians to hire tion. Female librarians’ role was to keep female library assistants, not only because the home fires burning while the men car- there were more trained female librarians ried out the serious business of war. than male available, but also because men The same authorities who objected to who were fit for military service were in- women’s employment in the camp librar- eligible. By the end of the war, camp li- ies, however, strongly encouraged their brarians were primarily young women and use as volunteers, often in the same speech old men, a far cry from the earlier vision or article, suggesting that the real reason of “men who are used to roughing it, who was not to protect women from the ardu- can stand strenuous work” (More workers ous labor but to promote librarianship as a needed, 1918, p. 421). masculine profession. The Camp Library Handbook promoted the use of volunteers Conclusion as an opportunity for the camp librarian “to show his organizing ability” (Library Librarianship in the United States con-
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 321 tinues to be a female-intensive profes- contexts are. We need to ask about the ex- sion that attempts to construct itself as tended web of institutional relationships masculine. By doing so it is denying its within which that librarianship exists, own history, values, and identity, so that how it is formed by the intersections of children’s librarians, who do work tradi- the institutions of race, gender, ethnicity, tionally associated with women, are ac- nationality, socio-eonomic status, culture, corded much less status and prestige than politics, the market and the state. We need system’s librarians, who do work tradi- to determine what professional identity tionally associated with men. It attempts the members of the profession derive from to serve a multi-cultural and multi-racial it, and if there are also multiple identities. population with white, middle-class li- How does that identity help members to brarians who have been educated in the make sense of their role and their position tradition of the “successful professional within their context, existing as it does at projects of class-privileged male actors at the intersection of race, gender, ethnicity, a particular point in history” (Witz, 1990, and socioeconomic status? p. 675). Women comprise nearly 85% of We need to establish a research agenda the profession (DPE, 2015), yet ALA con- that rejects all preconceptions about pro- tinues to promote a white Western male fession and professional education and is middle-class construction of professional open to alternate models and paradigms of education as formal education based on the professions (Hannigan & Crew, 1993; science and the control of knowledge and Maack, 1997). We must employ the meth- its application. Education for librarianship ods of qualitative research—ethnography, continues to be imposed upon the profes- grounded theory, discourse analysis—in sion by the faculty of schools of library order to recognize, identify, examine and and information science rather than be- explore the many intersections within the ing informed by the members of the pro- web—or webs—of institutional relation- fession. There are continuing attempts by ships of the specific community and indi- the faculty of such schools to change the viduals we are studying. Only in this way profession into something more culturally can we identify the traits and structures “masculine” particularly by incorporating that are the most productive, efficient, and information science and technology into effective within that context. the curriculum and thereby increasing the We must explore what it means to be a number of men in the profession, as if a straight black female librarian in the rural female-intensive profession is a problem southern United States, a gay white male to be solved. This also assumes that men librarian in a northern metropolitan city, as a whole are attracted to technology and a Native American librarian on a reser- not to traditional librarianship solely on vation in the western United States, or a the basis of their gender. first-generation Asian-American librarian It is tempting to ask what form a female serving an immigrant Vietnamese com- profession or a black profession or an Indi- munity in New Orleans. Library educa- an profession would take and how educa- tors internationally need to ask appropri- tion for that profession would be provided, ate versions of these questions for their but those are the wrong questions. Those social and cultural contexts and identify questions perpetuate a traditional gendered the intersections among race, gender, eth- and race-based construction of profession nicity and socioeconomic status in their and its reflection of Western cultural mas- contexts. We all need to discover what culine ideals as normative. What we need services communities actually need from to ask is what the context is in which li- libraries and librarians, as well as how brarianship as a profession is performed, those communities function, rather than or better, what the multiple and varied educating professionals to impose services
322 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE upon them in the form designed for white, March 17, 2016. http://dpeaflcio.org/programs- middle-class American communities in publications/issue-fact-sheets/library-workers- the 20th century. facts-figures/ Education for librarianship in the 21st Du Mont, R. R. (1986). The educating of black li-brarians: an historical perspective. Journal of century must be informed by, and ground- Education for Library & Information Science, 26 ed in, the actual practice of librarians in (4), 233–49. doi:10.2307/40323272. their communities. We must accept that Dyab, M. M. (2002). Development of Library and there will be multiple answers to the ques- Information Science Education in Eastern and tion of how best to educate for librarian- South Africa: An Historical Review. Herald of ship, which means that we must be open to Library Science, 41(1/2), 5–16. alternate forms, including teaching librar- Eddy, J. (2001). “We have become too tender-heart-ed”: the language of gender in the public library, ies and apprenticeship programs (Moss, 1880–1920. In T. Augst and W. Wiegand (Eds.) 1980; Gorman, 1981; Kelly, 2013), under- Libraries as Agencies of Culture (pp. 155–172). graduate degrees for para-professionals, Madison: University of Madison Press. and certification of individuals in addition Freeman, M. (1992). In transition: Some thoughts to accreditation of graduate programs. and musings on the evolution of British librarian- ship. New Library World 93(6), 22–24. References Freeman, M. (1997). Is librarianship in the UK a true profession, a semi-profession or a mere oc- cupation? New Library World 98(2), 65–69. Adams, J., Clemens, E. S., & Orloff, A. S. (2005). Introduction: Social theory, modernity, and three Garrison, D. (1979). Apostles of Culture: The Pub- waves of historical sociology. In J. Adams, E. lic Librarian and American Society, 1876–1920 S. Clemens and A. A. Orloff (Eds.) Remaking (New York: Free Press, 1979). modernity: Politics, history and sociology (pp. Goodell, F. (1918) Camp Wheeler, Georgia. Li- 1–72). Durham: Duke Univ. Press. brary Journal 43(6), 423. ALA Bulletin. (1918). 12 Gorman, M. (1981). The new teaching library. ALA. (1999). Library directors: gender & salary. American Libraries 12, 670–671. Retrieved March 17, 2106. http://www.ala.org/ Grogan, D. J. (2007). Education for librarianship: research/librarystaffstats/diversity/libdirector- Some persistent issues. Education for Informa- shttp://www.ala.org/research/librarystaffstats/ tion, 25(1), 5–26. diversity/libdirectors Grotzinger, L. A. (1994). Invisible, indestructible Boone, E. (2003). Cross border influences for li- network: women and the diffusion of librarian- brarianship: The Toronto experience. Journal of ship at the turn of the century. In L. A. Grotz- Educational Media & Library Sciences, 41(2), inger, J. V. Carmichael, and M. N. Maack, (Eds.) 163–170. Women’s work: vision and change in librarian- Bruce, L. (2012). Professionalization, gender, and ship: papers in honor of the centennial of the librarianship in Ontario, 1920-75. Library & In- University of Illinois Graduate School of Library formation History 28(2), 117–34. and Information Science (pp. 7–16) Urbana: Coleman, S. J. Jr. (2014). ‘No room for her here!’ Graduate School of Library and Information Sci- The numerical feminization of public librarian- ence, University of Illinois. ship in England, 1871–1914. Library & Informa- Gupta, S. (1993). Development of the library pro- tion History 30(2), 90–109. fession and education in Ethiopia. International Dana, John C. (1900). Report of the Committee on Information & Library Review, 25(1), 73–83. doi Library Schools. Library Journal (July), 83–86. :10.1080/10572317.1993.10762311 Daniels, C. (2008). “The feminine touch has not Hannigan, J. A., & Crew, H. S. (Dec 1993). A femi- been wanting:” Women librarians at Camp Zach- nist paradigm for library and information science. ary Taylor, 1917–1919. Libraries & the Cultural Wilson Library Bulletin, 68, 28–32. Record 43(3), 286–307. Harris, R. (1992). Librarianship: the erosion of a Davis, D. G. Jr. (2005). Ninety years of educa- woman’s profession. Norwood: Ablex. tion for the profession: Reflections on the early Hildenbrand, S. (1983). Revision versus reality: years. Journal of Education for Library and In- women in the history of the public library move- formation Science, 46(3), 266–274. http://doi. ment, 1876–1920. In K. Heim (Ed.) The status org/10.2307/40323850 of women in librarianship: historical, sociologi- Department for Professional Employees. (2015). cal, and economic issues (pp. 7–27). New York: Library workers: facts and figures. Retrieved Neal-Schuman.
The Work Calls for Men: The Social Construction of Professionalism 323 Hildenbrand, S. (1992). A historical perspective on for blacks, 1925–1941. Libraries & Culture, 31, gender issues in American librarianship’, Cana- 299-325. dian Journal of Information Science/Revue Ca- Moniarou-Papaconstantinou, V., & Tsatsaroni, A. nadienne des sciences de l’information, 17 (3), (2008). Library and information science educa- 18–28. tion in Greece: Institutional changes and current Hildenbrand, S. (1996). Women in library history: issues. Education for Information, 26(2), 85–100. from the politics of library history to the history More workers needed. (1918). Library Journal of library politics. In S. Hildenbrand (Ed.) Re- 43(6), 421. claiming the American library past (pp. 1–23). Moss, R. (1980). Schools for the axe? Library As- Norwood: Ablex. sociation Record 82, 328, 331. Hildenbrand, S. (2000). Library feminism and li- Passet, J. (1994). Cultural crusaders: Women li- brary women’s history: activism and scholarship, brarians in the American West, 1900–1917. Al- equity and culture. Libraries & culture, 35 (1), buquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 51–65. Personal note from a librarian. (1917). War Library Honma, T. (2005). Trippin’ over the color line: The Bulletin 1(2), 5. invisibility of race in library and information studies. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Educa- Putnam. H. (1918). Women and the work they do. tion and Information Studies 1(2), 1–26. War Library Bulletin, 1(4), 9. Kelley, M. (2013, May). Can we talk about the Raghavan, K. S. (2005). Education for knowledge MLS? Library Journal. p. 8. organization: The Indian scene. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, 41(2), 105–119. Koch, T. W. (1918) War Service of the American Library Association. Washington, D.C.: ALA Rathbone, J. A. (1918). Mobilizing Librarians. War War Service. Library Bulletin 1(6), 4. Kumar, K., & Sharma, J. (2010). Library and Infor- Richardson, J. V. (1992). The gospel of scholar- mation Science Education in India: A Historical ship: Pierce Butler and a critique of American Perspective. DESIDOC Journal of Library & In- librarianship. United States of America: Scare- formation Technology, 30(5), 3–8. http://dx.doi. crow Press. org/10.14429/djlit.30.609 Richardson, J. V. (2000). The origin of Soviet edu- Library War Service. (1918a). Camp Library Hand- cation for librarianship: The role of Nadezhda book. Washington D.C.: ALA War Service. Konstantinovna Krupskaya, Lyubov’ Borisovna Khavkina-Hamburger, and Genrietta K. Abele- Library War Service. (1918b). Soldiers, Sailors and Derman. Journal of Education for Library & Books. Washington, D.C.: ALA War Service. Information Science, 41(2), 106–128. http://doi. Lin, S. C. (1985). Historical development of library org/10.2307/40324059 education in China. Journal of Library History, Shera, J. H. (1972). The foundations of education 20368-386. for librarianship. New York: Becker and Hayes. Lo, M. M. (2005). The professions: Prodigal daugh- Shiflett, L. (1994). The American Library Associa- ters of modernity. In J. Adams, E. S. Clemens tion’s quest for a black library school. Journal of and A. A. Orloff (Eds.) Remaking modernity: Education for Library & Information Science, Politics, history and sociology (pp. 381–406). 35(1), 68–72. doi:10.2307/40323158. Durham: Duke Univ. Press. Stauffer, S. M. (2005a). Polygamy and the public Maack, M. N. (1994). Women as visionaries, men- library: The establishment of public libraries in tors, and agents of change. In L. A. Grotzinger, J. Utah before 1910. Library Quarterly 75(3), 346– V. Carmichael, and M. N. Maack, (Eds.) Wom- 370. en’s work: vision and change in librarianship: Stauffer, S. M. (2005b). “She speaks as one having papers in honor of the centennial of the Univer- authority”: Mary E. Downey’s use of libraries as sity of Illinois graduate school of library and in- a means to public power. Libraries & Culture, formation science (pp. 105–130) Urbana: Gradu- 40(1), 38–62. ate School of Library and Information Science, Stauffer, S. M. (2011). A good social work: Wom- University of Illinois. en’s clubs, libraries, and the construction of a Maack, M. N. (1997). Toward a new model of the secular society in Utah, 1890–1920. Libraries & information professions: embracing empower- the Cultural Record 46(2), 135–155. ment. Journal of Education for Library and In- Stauffer, S. M. (2014). The intelligent, thoughtful formation Science, 38(4), 283–302. http://doi. personality: Librarianship as a process of identity org/10.2307/40324190 formation. Library & Information History 30(4), Martin, R. S., & Shiflett, L. (1996). Hampton, 254–272. Fisk, and Atlanta: The foundations, the Ameri- Stauffer, S. M. (2015). “Mr. Dewey is crazy and can Library Association, and library education Katharine Sharp hates the University of Chi-
324 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE cago”: Gender, power, and personality and the Education for Library and Information Science demise of the University of Chicago Course in 26 (4), 267–80. Library Science 1897–1903. Journal of Educa- Wiegand, W. A. (1986b). The politics of an emerg- tion for Library & Information Science 56(2), ing profession: The American Library Associa- 101-113. doi: 10.12783/issn.2328-2967/56/2/5 tion, 1876–1917. New York: Greenwood. Thakur, U. M. (2004). UGC and Library & Infor- Wiegand, W.A. (1989). The development of librari- mation Science Education in India. Herald of Li- anship in the United States. Libraries and Cul- brary Science, 43(1/2), 76–80. ture, 24 (1), 99–109. Thomison, D. (1978). A history of the American Li- Wilson, C. S., Kennan, M. A., Willard, P., & Boell, brary Association 1876–1972. Chicago: Ameri- S. K. (2010). Fifty years of LIS education in can Library Association. Australia: Academization of LIS educators in Vann, S. K. (1961). Training for librarianship be- higher education institutions. Library & Infor- fore 1923: Education for librarianship prior to mation Science Research, 32(4), 246–257. doi: the publication of Williamson’s report on train- 10.1016/j.lisr.2010.07.006. ing for library service. Chicago: American Li- Witz, A. (1990). Patriarchy and professions: The brary Association. gendered politics of occupational closure. Sociol- Walia, P. K. (2010). Library and Information Sci- ogy 24(4), 675–590. ence education in North India. DESIDOC Jour- Young, A. P. (1981). Books for Sammies: The nal of Library & Information Technology, 30(5), American Library Association and World War I. 9–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.14429/djlit.30.610 Pittsburgh: Beta Phi Mu. War Service for Librarians. (1918). Library Occur- Zhou, N., & Lin, L. (1990). Forty years of develop- rent 5, 38. ment of library and information science educa- Wiegand, W. A. (1986a). Perspectives on library tion in China. Journal of Education for Library & education in the context of recently published lit- Information Science, 31(2), 162–169. http://doi. erature on the history of professions. Journal of org/10.2307/40323402