"THE PLACE TO GO": THE 135TH STREET BRANCH LIBRARY AND THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE' Sarah A. Anderson2 In the early 1920s, the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library, under the leadership of Ernestine Rose, played a significant role in the Har- lem Renaissance movement. By drawing on the resources of the community, the library staff facilitated connections between writers and their readers with literary gatherings; between artists and their viewers with art exhibi- tions; and between playwrights, performers, and their audiences with theatri- cal productions. But the library's most significant legacy was its book collec- tion, now known as the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, which has provided a permanent connection between a people and their history. Introduction On the corner of 135th Street and Malcolm X Boulevard in Harlem stands the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, one of four research libraries of the New York Public Library.3 Over 5 million items constitute its collections, which include over four thousand rare books and manuscript collections, over twenty thousand items in its Arts and Artifacts collections, over half a million photographs and prints, and more than five thousand motion pictures and videotapes, all documenting the history and culture of peoples of African descent 1. This article is based on the author's Masters thesis at Northwestern University, 1997, written under the direction of Sandra L. Richards of the Department of African-American Studies, College of Arts and Sciences, and Department of Theater, School of Speech. 2. Associate Professor of Bibliography, North Park University, 3225 West Foster Avenue, Chi- cago, Illinois 60625; Telephonie 773-244-5584; Fax 773-244-4891; E-mail saanderson@ northpark.edu. 3. The other three research libraries are the Center for the Humanities; the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts; and the Science, Industry, and Businiess Library. lLibrary Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 383-421] ?) 2003 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-251 9/2003/73040002$10.00 383
384 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY throughout the world, with a particular emphasis on those who have settled in the Americas and the Caribbean. Besides housing these col- lections and providing access to its many readers, the center reaches an even broader public through its seminars, forums, colloquia, exhibi- tions, film screenings, and performing arts productions.4 The present study, however, concerns itself with an earlier era of this remarkable library: the early 1920s, when it was known simply as the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library (see fig. 1). In account after account of the literary activity that characterized much of what is commonly referred to as the Harlem Renaissance, a period of prodigious literary output among black writers, homage is paid to the 135th Street Branch and its head librarian, Rose. Langston Hughes recalls coming to Harlem at the age of nineteen: "On a bright September morning in 1921, I came up out of the subway at 135th and Lenox into the beginnings of the Negro Renaissance. I headed for the Harlem Y.M.C.A. down the block, where so many new, young, dark, male arrivals in Harlem have spent early days. The next place I headed to that afternoon was the Harlem Branch Library just up the street. There, a warm and wonderful librarian, Miss Ernestine Rose, white, made newcomers feel welcome, as did her assistant in charge of the Schomburg Collection, Catherine Latimer, a luscious cafe au lait" [1, p. 312I.5 Many such references in memoirs and histories of this period hint at the significant role that the library played in the Harlem community, but the mention is often little more than a sentence. The purpose of this study is to offer a more complete picture of the important role that this library played in its community during the early years of the 1920s, and how its development into a major research library can be seen as a permanent legacy of the Harlem Renaissance. An examina- tion of what actually went on at the library and who was involved in its activities shows that it provided an essential connection between young writers, artists, playwrights and their public. The library director, Rose, articulated her visions of library service for underserved populations in numerous writings and in her administration of the library. She drew on the social capital of the community to create a dynamic relationship between the library and its public. Programming at the library capital- ized on a growing interest in black issues within the community with its literary and civic forums, the art exhibitions of 1921 and 1922, and 4. For current program and exhibition information see the Schomburg home page: http: //www.nypl.org/research/sc/sc.html (last accessed January 2004). 5. The library did not acquire the Schomburg Collection until 1926; in 1921 the library would not have been referred to as the Schomburg Collection.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 385 Fic;. 1.-Photograph of the 135th Street Branich of the New York Puiblic Library in the 1920s. Photographs anid Prints Division, Schombuirg Ceniter for Research in Black C ulture, New York. the dramatic productions of W. E. B. Du Bois' Krigwa Players. But the library's most significant legacy was its collection of books and artifacts relating to the study of black culture, a collection that would provide a lasting connection between a people and their history. The establish- ment of the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints in 1925- the precursor to the Schomburg Center-was the formal validation of this burgeoning interest in black history and culture.
386 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The story of this library does not belong to a single figure, such as Rose or Arthur Schomburg, or even to a group of illustrious figures such as Hughes or Countee Cullen, whose names we call upon to lend status to a once obscure branch library. Rather, the real story belongs to a confluence of interests and a mission whose time had come. The library provided a space in which a people, long denied an understand- ing and appreciation of their own history and culture, could explore what it meant to be black. It became a sphere for public discourse; within this domain, voices representing a wide range of political and aesthetic viewpoints found expression and audience. Building on its community foundation and local interests, the library grew into a world-class research institution that continues to bring readers and in- quiries from all over the world. While much has been written concerning the Schomburg Collection itself and the New York Public Library's acquisition of it in 1926, infor- mation relating to the library during the early years of that decade is more fragmentary. Rose left a rich trail of her thoughts about her work, although not about her personal life, in her writings about public li- brary service. But little has been written about her: Celeste Tibbets' monograph on her that was published by the Schomburg Center [21, an article by BettyJenkins [3], and a chapter in Elinor Sinnette's biog- raphy of Schomburg provide the core of the literature treating Rose and the 135th Street Branch [4]. An interesting collection of ephemera in the Schomburg Archives provides a more detailed look into the activ- ities and figures that made the 135th Street Branch such fertile cultural ground. A Librarian and Her Mission: Connecting with the Community During the early years of the 1920s, the 135th Street Branch served a community eager for self-expression and self-knowledge. One individ- ual, a white librarian named Rose, deserves a central place in the his- tory of this extraordinary branch library, but the ultimate success and legacy of the library are largely due to Rose's initial instinct and ability to share her responsibility with members of the community.6 When she died, after serving twenty-two years as head librarian at the 135th Street Branch, the New York Amsterdam News published a laudatory obituary, quoting her successor at the library: "Negroes should honor her be- cause she took a stand for integration at a time when it was unpopular 6. There is no apparent relationship between the Ernestine Rose of this study and the early nineteenth century women's rights activist Ernestine Rose (1810-1892), aJewish immi- grant from Poland.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 387 to do so" [5]. The article also credits Rose for having obtained the Schomburg Collection for the library. But throughout the article and in the large headline, Rose is mistakenly referred to as "Miss Ernestine Rhodes." Whether such a mistake resulted from either the oversight of a newspaper editor or a misunderstood pronunciation of her name, it is somewhat fitting. Rose was not a self-promoter; she believed a branch library existed to become an integral part of a community; and she was convinced that the less visible she was, as the white librarian representing a municipal library system that would not even admit blacks to its board of trustees for another fifty years, the more clearly she would enable the library to realize its own potential. Rose found the population in this area that needed to be served and the human resources within it that could contribute substantially to the process. Recognizing that librarians too often failed to make the connection between a library and its community, Rose understood "how vitally im- portant it is that [a librarian] should study people and their interests" and that by connecting with those interests he or she can make the library "a living, vital force, to touch those interests at as many points as possible, through his book collection, through the personnel of his staff, through his method of approach, his publicity and his activities of all kinds" [6, p. 206]. When Rose was appointed librarian of the Harlem Branch of the New York Public Library in 1920 at the age of forty, she brought to the position seven years of experience with two branch libraries in immi- grant communities on New York's Lower East Side: the Chatham Square Branch and the Seward Park Branch. Rose's enthusiasm for work in the immigrant neighborhoods is evident in a small pamphlet she wrote in 1917 as part of a series "Library Work with the Foreign Born." In it she described the various activities and practices of librari- ans as they transformed their libraries into meaningful community in- stitutions through reading clubs, art exhibits, debate societies, and home visits. But she never lost sight of the library's patrons who consti- tuted the heart of the library, which "is made a living force by the boys and girls, with their clubs; by the mothers, who find their only intellectual center at the library; by the newspaper men, who find us doing work of which they wish to tell their readers; by the teachers who bring their classes to us; by the professional men, who ask us to join their welfare organizations; by the artists, who offer us their pictures to be exhibited" [7, p. 27]. The Harlem Community Rose continued to champion the resources of community when she ar- rived in Harlem. She was an acute observer of her new neighborhood and soon saw the vital role a library could serve in it. In her first year
388 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Rose studied her community closely. She knew of its churches-that, for example, the Sunday School of Mother Zion Church had a membership of 700 and that the average attendance on Sunday was 500. She observed more and more posters featuring black artists; she recognized that the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) and the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) were important institutions in this city within a city, the YWCA having its own apartrnent house where new arrivals to Harlem would often stay; she learned of the six newspapers serving this particular population; and she observed that "'several artists of real worth work in Harlem" [8, p. 255]. But while the common denominator of race that so sharply separated the community from the communities of its white neighbors suggested homogeneity, Rose went on to explore the many divisions of nationality, education, language, politics, and even shades of color that divided the people. She was well aware that Marcus Garvey, the outspoken leader of the African nationalist Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) and the distinguished Harvard- educated Du Bois, one of the founders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and editor of The Cisis, repre- sented just two of the more noteworthy political expressions articulated in the community at the time. Rose also understood that she needed to sell the concept of a public library to her community. A public library was not an institution one took for granted in 1920, particularly in such a community. "It is to be remembered that many of these grown people, coming from the South, have never been permitted to enter a public library. That they are welcome, and that the place is free, must continually be repeated" [8, p. 257]. Rose recognized early on the importance of the Harlem churches to the community and thus their importance in marketing the library. The churches welcomed the librarians who came to speak at the Sunday schools. "The children's librarian has found that Mrs. Dana's 'Life ofJesus' is received with great enthusiasm by the children, who know the stories by heart" [8, p. 257]. The schools provided an- other promising avenue for reaching children, and the location of the elementary school across the street from the library made it easy for whole classes to come visit the children's room. Perhaps the most strik- ing example of the library's effort to reach into the community to ad- vertise itself was in the practice of home visits, in which a librarian would visit a home with a specific purpose in mind, such as explaining the lending policies for children. The larger purpose would be to in- vite the whole family to make use of the library and its resources [7, p. 14]. Rose recognized the importance of providing black children with material related to their own race history and affairs. The list of meetings held at branch libraries in the annual report of the New York
"THE PLACE TO GO" 389 Public Library mentions a high school Boys' Club, which met twice a month at the 135th Street Branch to study Negro history in 1921 and 1922 [9, P. 427]. In 1925, Rose reflected on the value of the book collec- tion she had been developing since her arrival in 1920: "These books will foster the interest of the children and young folk in the history of their own race and inspire them to develop their own talents" [10, p. 189]. Placing announcements about library activities in the local news- papers and posting them at moving picture houses provided another means of reaching a public not in the habit of using a public library. But it was the elite stratum of Harlem society that Rose identified as an essential partner and that distinguished Harlem from the immigrant communities in which she had previously worked: "The library must gain the interest and support of this social and professional, often wealthy, group before it can hope to become an integral part of negro life. These people are among our best readers, and the books they read are similar to those of any cosmopolitan reading public." Examples of popular books among such readers were Du Bois' Darkwater (1920) and Lathrop Stoddard's Rising Tide of Color (1920). "Books exploiting the old-time 'darky,' with his dialect and his antics, as for instance, E. K Means, will be read, but they are resented by the thinking, self- conscious group" [8, pp. 257-58]. Race Issues in Library Service Writing in 1917 about her work with the immigrant populations she served at the Seward Park and Chatham Square libraries, Rose stressed the importance of the entire staff's learning about the culture of the host community: "Accurate knowledge of the people, their back- grounds, social and human, is the first essential. By this I mean an intimate acquaintance on the part of every member of the library with the history, traditions and literature of each nationality that the library expects to serve.... The artificial 'missionary spirit,' so lauded in the past, will die, as it should, a natural death.... One cannot patronize and still hope to be accepted as a friend" [7, p. 20]. When she arrived in Harlem, Rose found an even more effective and efficient way of getting to know her new community: during her first five months she hired two black staff members and encouraged volun- teer efforts from community members [11]. While employing blacks on the staff of the library was a principle about which Rose felt strongly with regard to the larger issue of race relations, she also understood the essential role that this staff could play in helping her connect with this community, to which she had come as an outsider. Her black assis- tants helped her learn about the neighborhood and its people and were instrumental in bringing the library and its services to the people,
390 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY as well as bringing the community into the library. While such steps sound rather obvious today, at the time Rose instituted such a practice, she was breaking new ground in a library world that was marked by racism and would continue to be so for decades [12]. Rose was aware of the ambitious task she had undertaken as a white person in a black city. Influenced by "that most illuminating book, Uames WeldonJohn- son's] The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man," she writes, "In at- tempting to make the library a part of this community ... the chief difficulty has been, and will remain, I am convinced, not in the alien and conflicting groups, but in the barrier . . . which separates all col- ored people from all whites at the present time" [8, p. 256]. The annual report of the New York Public Library for 1920 singled out the 135th Street Branch for special mention: "Two interesting and significant features are the progress in children's work and the employ- ment of colored assistants." The introduction of the assistants "has resulted in greadly increased confidence among the readers, and has been well received by the whole Staff" [13, pp. 239-40]. The Harlem Branch was one of the top-five branches in Manhattan in numbers of new registered users from July to December 1920, and the growth con- tinued steadily.7 By 1925, five of ten assistants would be black. Early on, however, Rose seemed determined not to see the Harlem Branch become a "colored library" for two reasons. By creating a "colored branch," one was in effect denying blacks the use of the other libraries in the system; second, such a practice kept black librarians from work- ing in other libraries [8, p. 256]. In an interview with the New York Times in 1925, Rose was still making this distinction: "Although work with the Negro is the outstanding feature of the 135th Street Library, Miss Rose is emphatic in saying that this library is not a 'Negro branch.' 'We are a branch of the New York Public Library,' said Miss Rose, 'and our clientele is about 95 per cent Negro"' [14]. In an article on the role of race consciousness that was written for the Southern Workman, she observed that the local public school and the public library were the only institutions in Harlem that employed both black and white workers-the YWCA and YMCA were staffed entirely by blacks. While not exactly criticizing the all-black staffing of such institutions, she found the experience of an integrated staff critical to her view of prog- ress on racial issues [15]. Rose's optimism, based on her own experience at the 135th Street Branch, was tempered by a realistic appreciation of the problems con- fronting the black worker everywhere. Besides writing often during 7. See 1920 Annual Report [13, pp. 239-40]. Subsequent annual reports reveal that the num- ber of applications for new borrowers' cards rose steadily from 3,575 in 1921 to 3,723 in 1922 to 3,934 in 1923, to a high of 4,022 in 1924.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 391 these first years about her own experience with race relations at the 135th Street Branch, Rose also sought to find out how other communi- ties addressed the issue of service to black populations. She organized an ALA roundtable discussion group, which met for three years, from 1921 to 1923, with librarians from around the country exchanging ideas on their experiences.8 A questionnaire that Rose had sent to 122 libraries throughout the country on the subject of service to black pop- ulations revealed that most cities with large numbers of blacks provided service in separate facilities staffed solely with inadequately trained black workers. At the second annual meeting in 1923, Rose reported specifically on the benefits of having a staff of both races, particularly for the white northern workers, whom Rose regarded as woefully igno- rant: "The average white person in the North does not know the Negro at all. His ideas are preconceived and colored by sentimentality. He sees colored people still as ex-slaves, pitiful objects grateful for his help- ing hand. When he learns that they are intelligent, struggling, resent- ful, and aggressive participants in the industrial and social battle of life, his sensibilities are shocked and his illusions destroyed. In this direc- tion the last year has taken a long step forward" [17, p. 275]. While the ALA roundtables were well attended, members were reluc- tant to create a permanent section to address the race problem in a more formal manner, because of the perception that the issues and strategies to deal with them varied too much from region to region. Not until 1961 did the ALA add a statement to their Library Bill of Rights that advocated access to all library services regardless of race, religion, national origins, or legal views [12, p. 503]. As chair of the roundtables, Rose may have appeared a bit too threatening to her fel- low librarians who preferred to handle their departments in keeping with their own communities' standards. Louis Shores, a white librarian at Fisk University, related an incident at a library dedication in 1930 in which Rose's outspoken positions on race relations so alienated several southern white librarians that she was removed from the program [18, p. 154]. Shores had come to know Rose when he worked at the main New York Public Library in the mid-1920s and traced his own strong sense of injustice at racial discrimination to the influence of Rose's "militant and sometimes confrontational posture" [4, p. 150]. Rose's advocacy of an integrated library staff was unusual at the time and would remain an exception to the rule in most U.S. libraries, even those within black communities, for decades. While a few opportunities for library training at accredited library schools had recently opened up (for example, two blacks were enrolled in regular classes at Carnegie Library School in Pittsburgh and one was accepted at the New York 8. For a detailed summary and discussion of these three annual ALA roundtable meetings, see Musmann [16, pp. 84-89].
392 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Public Library School), Rose worried that newly trained black librarians would be limited in the opportunities open to them for full employ- ment anywhere other than in black organizations [ 19, p. 207] .9 Besides employing black assistants on her own staff, Rose felt it important to try to place black librarians and assistants in white neighborhood branches. Such an exchange was made satisfactorily between the 135th Street Branch and the Woodstock Branch in the Bronx. Rose's succes- sor at the Harlem Branch, Dorothy Homer, would recall that Rose had found jobs for her in branches that were formerly staffed only by whites [2, p. 4]. And Elise McDougald took note of library work as a relatively new field of opportunity for black women in her chapter "The Task of Negro Womanhood," which appeared in Alain Locke's The New Negro (1925). She singled out the Harlem Branch and its black staff as her example, capturing something of Rose's drive: "The vision of those in charge of [the assistants'] training is illuminated by fires that have somewhat of a missionary glow. There is an everpresent hope that, once trained, the Negro woman librarian will scatter such opportunities across the country, establishing branches wherever none exist" [20, p. 376]. Although she mayjustifiably have felt some satisfaction in the appar- ent success of her work with an integrated staff, it must be remembered that the system in which they were operating was a large municipal bureaucracy, which could prove difficult to work around. By the end of the decade, a period that is beyond the scope of this present study, Rose would be facing Du Bois' charges of racial discrimination. Du Bois wrote to his friend Ferdinand Q. Morton, the first black member of the New York Municipal Civil Service Commission, to enlist some political support in attacking what he perceived was discrimination in hiring policy or in practice at least in the New York Public Library system. In a long letter dated February 18, 1930, Du Bois outlined the situation, accusing Rose of "much hesitation and dilly-dallying" in recommend- ing Regina Andrews for promotion to the position of first assistant [21, pp. 416-17]. Regina Andrews did get her promotion and enjoyed a long and fruitful career as a librarian at both the Washington Heights Branch and the 116th Street Branch near Columbia through the 1970s, when she retired with accolades for her distinguished service. Two years after the Regina Andrews case, in 1932, Du Bois was still exerting his influence in library personnel matters. The correspondence among 9. These few instances did not turn into a widespread trend. According to a poll by the ALA, by 1929 only four library schools were admitting black students to their programs, although a library school at Hampton Institute in Virginia opened in 1925 for the express purpose of educating black librarians. See Du Mont [12, pp. 490-91].
"THE PLACE TO GO" 393 Du Bois, Rose, and the head of the branch system of the New York Public Library, Franklin Hopper, reveals concern among some of the staff and community that not enough black librarians were being em- ployed [22]. The fact that Du Bois was moved to become so involved in the library's personnel matters indicates the degree to which Rose's initiative at the 135th Street Branch succeeded in obtaining the com- munity's investment in the library's affairs. By then the community rightly regarded the library as an institution of its own. 135th Street Branch Personnel Rose's writings and work with the ALA roundtables reflected strongly held convictions based on what was by then only a few years of experi- ence in working with a mixed staff. But her career at the 135th Street Branch would prove her early assessments correct. Staff and volunteers were the key elements in the library's mission to invest itself in the community and to bring about the investment of the community in the library. "One of the services which the colored assistants render the library is the knowledge of neighborhood affairs and people which they gain far more quickly than the members of the alien race, even if they entered the district as strangers at the same time. This intimacy has been of great advantage in making the library better known" [8, p. 257]. The kind of involvement Rose envisioned her staff making with the Harlem community could be described as developing "social capital." Robert Putnam uses this term to describe those horizontal (as opposed to vertical or hierarchical) networks of interaction that bring together more or less equal segments of a community or organization. He upholds "networks of civic engagement [such as neighborhood as- sociations] as an essential form of social capital. The denser such net- works in a community, the more likely that its citizens will be able to cooperate for mutual benefit" [23, p. 173]. Although Putnam is look- ing at the impact of social capital (or lack thereof, as in his later essay "Bowling Alone")"'{ in political terms, it is an apt image for the kinds of networks that characterized Harlem in the 1920s and were taken advantage of by the 135th Street Branch. The staff of the library pro- vided the first line of access to this network. One of the first actions Rose took after her appointment as head of the 135th Street Branch in June 1920, was to appoint a black assistant, Catherine Latimer, who would stay at the library for twenty-six years [11]. Frequently referred to as the first black professional librarian in the New York Public Library system, Latimer had completed two years 10. Robert D. Putnam, "Bowling Alone: America's Declining Social Capital,"Journal ofDemoc- racy 6 (January 1995): 65-78.
394 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY at Howard University, including one year of library training. Her inter- est in the black experience led her to develop a "clipping file" of selected articles that is still in use. In November 1920, Rose added another black assistant, Sadie M. Peterson (later Delaney). Peterson's training included only a year at Miss McGovern's School of Social Work in Poughkeepsie, New York, but she was an eager supporter of the li- brary, seeing it as "the center of Negro culture . . . the place for a Chaucer to write 'A Canterbury Tale' . . . a place for a poet to verse his new song for this great reading public" [24, pp. 772-73]. Her li- brary work with children included school groups, boy scouts, juvenile delinquents, and the blind, a group in whom she seemed to have a particular interest. When she left in 1923 to organize a library for the Veterans Administration Hospital in Tuskegee, Alabama, she contin- ued this interest, becoming a pioneer in bibliotherapy [25, p. 105]. While in Harlem Peterson used her social contacts and civic connec- tions to the library's advantage. Before leaving for Tuskegee she re- ceived a letter from the executive secretary of the New York Urban League, who commented on "the growing esteem of which the people of Harlem hold the work of the 135th Street Branch. I deeply appreci- ate your share in this" [26, p. 124]. Another newcomer to the staff was a Puerto Rican woman, Pura Belpre, whom Rose recruited upon find- ing a Spanish-speaking population close to the library during one of her "neighborhood walking tours" [4, p. 134]. In 1922, two more black women joined Rose's staff and helped further the connections Rose wished to make with the community, particularly with the young writers who were beginning to move to Harlem. Nella Larsen Imes had given up on making any professional progress in nursing, her field of training. After resigning from the Department of Health in September 1921, Larsen Imes volunteered for a few months at the 135th Street Branch and joined the staff inJanuary 1922. Of mixed race herself, she had found the strict segregation of the nursing profession intolerable. Black nurses were invariably assigned work in "colored-only" clinics or hospitals, or homes, a practice Rose may have had in mind as she fought the designation "colored library" [27, pp. 139-40]. In 1924 Larsen Imes was promoted from assistant to children's librarian, in charge of the ex- tremely busy children's room. Besides providing story hours and books for school classes, such as those the young poet-teacher Cullen brought over from the school across the street, the librarians encouraged after- school activities such as art workshops. Roberta Bosely, Cullen's cousin and a library assistant, recalled putting an exhibition of children's artwork in the library [4, pp. 131, 223]. One of the would-be artists was Jacob Lawrence, whose work during the 1930s for the Work Progress Adminis- tration (W.PA) would earn him considerable recognition among African American artists.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 395 An avid reader and aspiring writer herself, Larsen Imes found herself comfortably at home in her new setting and enjoyed the ever-increasing activities at the library and contacts with young writers who were congre- gating there. For an aspiring writer the 135th Street Branch proved to be "a grandstand seat from which to observe all of the latest milestones in New Negro doings" [27, p. 166]. Larsen Imes eventually resigned in 1926 for health reasons and devoted herself full time to writing. Her short stories were written under the pseudonym Allen Semi, and in 1928 and 1929, respectively, Quicksand and Passingwere published to considerable, if not unqualified, acclaim. Another black librarian who joined the staff in 1922 was Regina An- derson (later Andrews). The daughter of a prominent Chicago crimi- nal lawyer and educated at the University of Chicago, she had worked in a library in Chicago. She moved to New York after her parents' di- vorce and applied for a job at the main library on 42nd Street. While Rose may not have been surprised at Anderson's reception at the cen- tral library, Anderson remembered her surprise and disappointment when the authorities assigned her to the Harlem Branch because of her color. But she soon came to appreciate her new surroundings and, with roommate Ethel Ray Nance, secretary to Charles S. Johnson of the influential magazine Opportunity, came to know many of the young writers and artists at work in Harlem [28]. Anderson worked as a circu- lation librarian and helped Rose recruit volunteers such as her room- mate, Nance, and Jessie Fauset, a novelist and editor of the NAACP's The Crisis. These staff members and volunteers would provide an impor- tant connection between the library and its community. And it would be a strength of the library that the personalities who met there often represented sharply opposed political or artistic philosophies. Al- though both Nance and Fauset were closely allied to Harlem's literary elite, this elite was not a monolithic entity. The men they worked for, Charles Johnson and Du Bois, were often sharply at odds with each other in their views of race matters, particularly the portrayal of blacks in literature and the arts. Johnson heralded the new black writers who turned increasingly to black folk and the lower classes for inspiration, while Du Bois and Fauset represented the Old Guard, who preferred to look toward the middle and upper classes-the "Talented Tenth"-for their subject matter. But all found a welcome at the 135th Street Branch. Programming: Connecting with the Audience Literary and Civic Forums The people most prominently associated with the Harlem Renaissance were its writers. Like many of his contemporaries, Arna Bontemps
396 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY moved to Harlem "to find the job [he] wanted, to hear the music of [his] taste, to see serious plays and, God willing, to become a writer." On his first day in Harlem, he went "looking for the Public Library because someone had told him it was the place to go" [27, p. 1611. By 1925, when Bontemps arrived, CharlesJohnson had begun his mag- azine Opportunity, and Du Bois' The Crisis was also in the business of trying to encourage young writers with its annual literary contests. But for several years the 135th Street Branch had already been informally encouraging young authors and providing them with an audience. While that audience was admittedly smaller than one the national pub- lications could offer, the library's efforts had nonetheless earned it the reputation of being the "place to go." The annual report of the New York Public Library for 1920 lists meet- ings that had been held in the various branch libraries during that year. Like many other libraries, the 135th Street Branch was the regular meeting place for such groups as the Red Cross, the Vocational School Teachers Association, the North Harlem Community Council, and a music school. Over the next few years the number of such meetings would triple, providing headquarters for the Anti-Lynching Crusaders, the Mozart Choral Society, and a Children's Good Behavior Club. But it was the literary events and the civic forums with their weekly meetings at which "prominent Negroes and white men interested in the colored race are taking advantage of the opportunity to speak to neighbor- hood groups on economic and race problems" that would leave their mark [13, p. 240]. One of the earliest speakers at the Thursday Night Forum was James Weldon Johnson, who talked in 1921 about the Haitian atrocities committed by the marines under the current U.S. occupation [8, p. 258]. The Haiti crisis was one of the first foreign policy issues that mobilized African American opinion, and Du Bois and Johnson of the NAACP were leaders of the opposition [29, pp. 344-60]. Other notable speakers included the white intellectual Carl Van Doren, black historian Carter Woodson, Jewish cultural anthropologist Melville Herskovits, and the Puerto Rican-born biblio- phile, Schomburg [30, p. 181 ]. The library forums reached the audiences who came to hear the noted speakers, but the press also often reported on such evenings. In January 1923, the Amsterdam News describ4ed in considerable detail a talk by Columbia University anthropologist Franz Boas at the 135th Street Branch to "a large and appreciative audience" on the pervasive myth of racial superiority [31, pp. 56-57]. Although an official policy on intellectual freedom was not passed by the ALA until 1939, the practice of respecting multiple viewpoints on an issue was a priority for Rose, and the Harlem Branch was an
"THE PLACE TO GO" 397 optimal location to test such a principle.11 In her writings on work in the immigrant communities, Rose explained: "There is not a branch library in the city, by the way, which does not afford a meeting place for at least one neighborhood organization. In several, three or four meetings are often being held at the same time.... There is one very important reason for this popularity of the library as a meeting place. It is the one institution, neutral, unbiased, without dogma, where all beliefs, creeds, ages and races may meet. You are free as air; you may come, you may go" [7, p. 12]. During the early 1920s, Harlem was the center of political contro- versy regarding black issues. Under the banner "Modern Racial ProW lems," an early library flyer announced the appearance of a spokesman for Garvey's Universal Negro Improvement Association, G. Emonei Carter, speaking on "Three great maxims as applied in the lives of Negroes." Hubert Harrison, a well-known street-corner speaker and political activist, offered weekly lectures on a variety of topics on Satur- day evenings, recommending books in the collection for further read- ing. Regina Anderson Andrews commented on the library's accommo- dating outside groups: "I have always been very glad that I was on Miss Rose's staff because she gave me a great deal of latitude in planning cooperation with community organizations. Within the library we pro- vided a platform for the soapbox orator. Our small auditorium offered one of the first platforms he had in Harlem" [33, p. 72]. In his autobi- ography Black and Conservative, George Schuyler described his appear- ance at a library forum in 1923 to debate the Dutch Guianan commu- nist spokesman Otto Huiswoud on the topic of the Negro and communism. In a characteristically sardonic voice, Schuyler recalled his argument that "the Negro had difficulty enough being black with- out becoming Red. . . . There was no other person around willing or able to debate Huiswoud, all the others being intellectual Socialists. We had quite a turn out and the debate was stirring. It was probably the first debate staged in the United States on this momentous subject" [34, pp. 145-46]. Schuyler maintained his connections to the library well into the 1930s when he served as secretary of its adult education program, the Harlem Education Committee. He credited Rose with "helping make Harlem's cultural life more than the 'arnchy' (Harlem- ese for 'stuck up'), thin reality it often was elsewhere." David Levering 11. Rose moved the adoption of the first Library's Bill of Rights to the ALA in 1939. Article II states: "As far as available material permits, all sides of questions on which differences of opinion exist should be presented fairly and adequately." The third article stipulates that "library meeting rooms should be available on equal terms to all groups in the com- munity regardless of their beliefs or affiliations" [32].
398 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Lewis, who is reporting this praise, adds his own explanation: "But considering the qualifications of her assistant, Regina Anderson, and the exceptional staff of evening volunteers like Gwendoyn Bennett, Fauset, and Nance, Miss Rose could have failed only if she had been resolutely dim" [35, p. 1051. Decades later Locke would recall the role the library played as he addressed Rose at the 1942 dedication of an annex to the 135th Street Branch: "My dear Miss Rose . . . My best wishes for the occasion and for the continued success and expansion under your devoted leadership of the community work of the Harlem Library Center. For years it has been an outstanding and pioneering public service" [3, p. 228]. Besides the forums devoted to political and racial issues, the library hosted regular book meetings at which recognized authors and other interested volunteers led discussions about books. The Book-Lover's Club and evening forums devoted to "Enjoyment of Books" met often throughout the 1920s. Responding to an increasing demand for more books by and about blacks, the library also began compiling book lists for its own readers and for libraries elsewhere. In 1925, the Branch Li- brary Book News, a monthly publication of the New York Public Library, published an annotated bibliography of over seventy titles compiled by the 135th Street Branch of books and magazines about and by blacks. The reading list was broken down into sections on "The Negro's Back- ground (Africa and the West Indies) . . . the Negro in American History ... Some Present Phases ... The Negro's Contributions."' Among the titles were some recent publications: Fauset's There is Confusion (1924), Hughes' Weary Blues (1926), Locke's The New Negro (1925), Cullen's poetry collection Color (1925), Claude McKay's Harlem Shadows (1922), andJean Toomer's Cane (1923), all titles associated today with the Har- lem Renaissance. The magazines listed included The Cisis, Opportunity, The Messenger, and the Journal of Negro History [36]. Those responsible for putting together this book list were clearly aware of the writers in their midst. In addition to serving aspiring authors' practical needs for source material and information on submitting manuscripts and finding re- ceptive editors, the library offered opportunities for young writers to read from their own works and to meet prominent literary people. Ar- nold Rampersad's biography of Hughes mentions the library as the place where the aspiring young writer came into contact with the "black intelligentsia.... Among the younger writers who frequented the Branch Library in Harlem, Hughes had met by far the most promis- ing-Countee Porter Cullen, then twenty years old" [37, p. 63]. Ramp- ersad also credits the volunteer efforts of such figures as Fauset and Nance: "With evening volunteers such as Jessie Fauset and Ethel Ray Nance of the Urban League, the library hosted an increasing number
"THE PLACE TO GO" 399 of readings, lectures, and soirees that brought Harlem book lovers to- gether. Best of all, a cosy little circle of promising young men and women, encouraged mostly byJessie Fauset, was now writing or working seriously in the arts in Harlem" [37, p. 82]. Other young writers who frequented the 135th Street Branch, where Regina Anderson had re- served a small area for them to work, included Eric Walrond and McKay [4, p. 132]. Anderson and her roommate Nance had gained a reputa- tion for their hospitality to new writers and artists in Harlem, and An- derson would "persuade her employer, librarian Ernestine Rose, that the community had a new talent whose works cried out for audition at the 135th Street library" [35, p. 129]. And while the critical recep- tion of literary editors was closely followed, Lewis concludes in his clas- sic book on the Harlem Renaissance, WMen Harlem Was in Vogue, that "whether they had really succeeded in portraying accurately the people they wrote about they only knew after acquitting themselves before Er- nestine Rose's audiences. The intellectual pulse of Harlem throbbed at the 135th Street library" [35, p. 105]. The key to such success lay in the connections that the library could make with those in the community who would take advantage of its resources. It was imperative to keep the library in the public mind. Rose wrote repeatedly to such prominent citizens as Du Bois, re- questing appearances before the forums [38]. She wrote articles about the library for the local press as well as for the library community. And she took advantage of willing volunteers, such as Fauset, who hosted readings and lectures at the library "that became the heart of Harlem's literary life" [39, p. 60]. The extent to which Rose was able to enlist the support of the community in the library's activities is also evident in the efforts the library made in promoting the arts. The Visual Arts The Harmon Foundation, named after the white philanthropist Wil- liam Elmer Harmon, began in 1926 to award achievement in the arts by blacks. That year, its first juried exhibition took place at the 135th Street Branch, although the 1928 Harmon Exhibition of the Work of Negro Artists, at the International House in New York, is generally cred- ited with being the first such show [40, p. 15; 41, p. 31]. The Harmon Foundation was credited repeatedly with making the first effort to rec- ognize the work of black artists. While the marketing expertise and success of its efforts were invaluable in reaching a larger public and in awakening a white audience to a new product, the Harmon Foundation was not the first group to attempt to assemble the work of black artists and to recognize their promise. 12 12. The Harmon Exhibition turned into a nearly annual affair, and by 1930 "the line between a foundation in the business of rewarding creative art and a business serving as a clearing-
400 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY In addition to providing a meeting place for literary activities and lectures on political issues, the 135th Street Branch also provided pub- lic exhibit space for work by black artists, beginning in 1921. One of the first public efforts that Rose made to reach out to the Harlem com- munity was the 1921 Art Exhibition held at the 135th Street Branch, an exhibition that was repeated the following year. Such an undertak- ing served several purposes. By bringing together the works of black artists, the exhibition awakened an audience within the community to the talents of their own. To put on the exhibit Rose enlisted the support of prominent members of the black community in New York, both in- side Harlem and without. Such support not only strengthened the ties between the library and the community but also brought further valida- tion to the artists and their work. A few references to the 1921 exhibit [42, p. 169; 43, p. 107] mention works by such prominent artists as Meta Warwick Fuller, Laura Wheeler Waring, and Henry 0. Tanner, but no catalog for the show is available. In the catalog for the 1922 exhibition forty-two artists are named, fif- teen of whom were Harlem residents, with others from as far away as Alabama and Chicago, and one "studying in Europe" [44]. Some of the artists whose oil paintings, watercolors, pastels, and etchings were chosen for the exhibit would be highlighted years later at the Harmon exhibits: W. M. Farrow of Chicago, Allan Randall Freelon of Philadel- phia, and James L. Wells of New York. The degree to which the artwork was or was not "Negro" in subject and style was a matter of concern to both those observing the scene and those writing on creative literature and dramatic efforts by blacks at this time. An article in the first issue of the new magazine Opportunity on "Our Young Negro Artists" quotes an earlier review of the 1922 art exhibit: "Those who would expect such a show to be altogether unsophisticated and of primitive variety must have been disappointed and if it demonstrated one thing it was that all the influences which make an average collection of contemporary paintings a medley of styles and experiments have a corresponding effect on aspiring Negro artists" [45]. The writer in Opportunity concluded, "In the main, there is noticed a rather significant absence of what artists frequently refer to as the 'Negro Motif,' the emphasis apparently being placed on general artistic themes" [45]. A quick look at the titles of the works on display in the catalog shows still lifes and landscapes dominating the subject matter of the show: "A Shady Spot Near Bladensburg, Md.," "Upper Potomac," "Peo- house for a foundation's artwork grew thinner" [35, p. 263]. The foundation's director and assistant excelled at finding Negro artists, displaying their work, and marketing it.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 401 nies-Water Color," "Apple Tree," "Chrysanthemums," "French Li- lacs," "Autumn," and "Summer." A contemporary review of the exhibit of the mostly amateur artists suggested that several, if not most, of the paintings were in the style of other recognized artists: "somewhat in the manner of Frank Schwartz, 1921 Prix de Rome winner," or "slight touches of the Impressionistic School." The reviewer, however, did give special mention of the few works with black subjects: a portrait of Booker T. Washington and "'Interested,' an intensely human study of a little 'pickanniny' with a newspaper" [46]. Rose was more pointed in her as- sessment in a review published in the Southern Workman: A very striking note in the exhibit was the preoccupation of the artists with general rather than racial subjects.... Negro artists are learning their trade. They are concerned largely with art as art, not as Negro art, and their struggle is for recognition in the realm of creation where race distinctions are less than nothing. As time goes on . it is inevitable that Negro artists will avail themselves of the riches inherent in their race history and consciousness, in its peculiar beauty and vigor. We look forward confidently to that time. Only then will American Negro art find its finest and most original expression [47, p. 543]. Both The Crisis and Opportunity magazines also covered the art exhib- its at the 135th Branch, recognizing the importance of yet another ex- pression of black culture: "The holding of exhibits and contests gives the artist an opportunity to place his work before the public, either for sale or prizes. This acts as a stimulus and calls for greater efforts through competition.... The work of immortalizing on canvas, or in stone, the story of the black race, awaits the man or woman so inspired" [48]. Rose had hopes of making the art exhibit an annual event, but there is no evidence that any more large-scale exhibits occurred after 1922 until the Harmon Foundation exhibit of 1926. However, the library maintained an interest in the arts, often exhibiting the work of individ- ual artists such as Farrow and Wells. Locke refers in 1925 to the library exhibition of color pastels by Winold Reiss, the German artist whose treatment of African American subject matter broke new ground, and whose work illustrated Locke's New Negro [49]. A New York Times article in 1925 refers to a specially made and enlarged Copley print of the Shaw memorial and to the gift to the library of a statue of Ethiopia by Fuller [14]. WAhen the library's Division of Negro Literature, History and Prints officially opened in 1925, a special exhibit of the black artist William E. Braxton's work was mounted. And Aaron Douglas, the promising young artist whose work had won awards from both Opportu- nity and The Crisis and who had also illustrated Locke's New Negro, con-
402 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tributed his talents to painting scenery for the little theater in the li- brary basement in 1926 and 1927. In her catalog essay for a retrospective exhibit of the work of black artists organized by the Studio Museum in Harlem in 1987, Mary Schmidt Campbell concludes that the work of the Harlem Renaissance artists "has the look of something new, something raw and deliberate, a tradition freshly crafted and conceived. If they contributed anything, they contributed the sense that for the first time the Black artist could take control of the images of Black America" [42, p. 55]. While contem- porary criticism argued over the merits of a segregated art form,13 and while the Harmon Foundation was at once acclaimed for its bringing the work of black artists before the public eye and decried for its "cod- dling and patronizing nature," Campbell sees in the best of these works a representation of an "urgent search for identity so prevalent in the Harlem Renaissance" [42, p. 52]. This search for an expression of what it was to be black lay at the bottom of similar efforts in poetry, drama, and intellectual thought in general. And the library pioneered in pro- viding a public space for this exploration. Besides spotlighting unheralded talent within the black community, the library's efforts at mounting these exhibitions helped bring to- gether a group of community members who would work together at creating an institution that would ultimately become an indispensable resource in the understanding of racial identity. But in 1921, such ideas were clearly not in the plans of men and women discussing the details of putting on an art show. According to library records, at least 175 letters were sent out for the first exhibit in 1921, many to pastors re- questing their aid in publicizing the event, in soliciting work from any possible exhibitors, and in suggesting "well-known women of the com- munity" who might serve well as hostesses for the event (see fig. 2) [52]. Among the activities surrounding the exhibit were plans for speakers, such as Schomburg, James Weldon Johnson, actors Charles Burroughs and Charles Gilpin, and writer William Braithwaite. Posters were to be exhibited in Harlem at the YWCA, YMCA, subway entrances, and further afield at New York University, City College, Columbia Uni- versity, and Manhattan and Lenox casinos. Letters were sent to the six newspapers that served the city's black population: the New York Age, the New York News, New York Dispatch, the Negro World, the New York Am- sterdam News, and the New York Star. The following year of 1922 shows an expanded effort at publicity and organization. The number of names on the stationery for the event 13. This debate is well captured in George Schuyler's and Hughes' articles, both of which were published in the Nation in 1926 [50, 51].
"THE PLACE TO GO" 403 S t cfA d r A - tLiL AAA?14 n-AL Irf-l" Am"A4 ~-tL 'teb wid -~ .~ ZLod* ~a a.,....ai. f. 4L C etL~..A.A d.* I I4Ia. Sitf ~L A - _ _ ,_ , t, ,LS L ~ ~ ~ ~ L c -. UJ4.Lr -. 9 WLA.a. , taat LL o( rva4ua. X FIG. 2.-Letter from E. C. Williams, executive secretary of the Negro Arts Exhibit, which was sent to ministers in Harlem, July 15, 1921. The letter asked for help in advertising the exhibit and for suggestions of women in the community who might serve as hostesses for the event. See Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, 1924-79, box 1, folder 11, Schom- burg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. had increased, and committees had been set up to divide the work. The minutes from the numerous meetings held in the months preced- ing the second exhibition reveal the extent to which the larger commu- nity was involved in executing this event. The list of committee mem- bers included A. G. Dill of The Crisis; bibliophile Schomburg; Fauset,
404 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY also of The Crisis; Louise Latimer, an artist; as well as dozens of others. The first page of the exhibit catalog shown in figure 3 lists the officers and committee chairs. The publicity committee reported on plans for a number of short talks to be delivered in churches by "minute men" along with the more predictable cards and posters. The social commit- tee reported on plans for a card dance at the Alpha Physical Culture League to raise operating funds. Admission to the party would be twenty-five cents per person, with committee members donating the refreshments. After much discussion, the matter of special stationery was settled, with the name "Exhibition of Negro Artists" replacing the previous year's "Negro Art Exhibit," which had drawn some criticism. Twenty-seven names appear on the stationery, including the five offi- cers, seven committee chairmen, and fifteen members at large. An- other list of nineteen women and two men named the hostesses and hosts for the event's run. These women and men were expected to be present to cover the two months the exhibit would run. With one exception, all lived in Harlem. Yet another list of invitees to an artists' reception included names drawn from the Arts and Letters Club of Harlem, with its 102 members. An examination of these folders of library miscellanies that chronicle the nuts-and-bolts organization behind the production of a two-month exhibition in a small public library branch reveals something more than the prosaic details of getting work done. Surely a much smaller committee could have been sufficient, with efficient leadership pro- vided by, perhaps, a chief librarian; but what was at work here, as it is with many such cultural enterprises, was the conscious cultivation of the cultural ground of the community. This was outreach at its height. By involving various elements of the society in the project, those re- sponsible found not just willing volunteers but a future audience and public for their artists. And, as with any enterprise dependent on volun- teerism, the degree to which those who were willing to lend their names to a list were also willing to put in some time and effort varied. In a letter to Rose in 1922, Fauset, the literary editor for Du Bois' The Crisis, wrote "I find I shall have to resign as Chairman of the Program Com- mittee of the Art Exhibit. I did not realize when I took on the job that it would be up to me also to work up the audiences. This I have no time to do. And on the other hand I do not like to subject my 'talent' to such small gatherings. Perhaps another year we shall be able to hit on something different. Yours truly, Jessie Fauset" [53]. This note serves as a reminder that this was a relatively minor cultural affair at a small branch library. The guest book for the 1921 exhibit indicated that 75 people attended on the opening day. But over a two-month period approximately 2,600 registered. Many were from Harlem, but
CATALOG OF Exhibition by Negro A1rtists HELD AT THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY 103 WEST 135TH STREET cAUGUST 1st TO OCTOBER,i lst 1922 p9 Officers DR. J. E. MOORLAND, Chairman MRS. E. P. ROBERTS, Assistant Chairman MR. A. G. DILL, Honorary Chairman MISS RUTH E. WHITEHURST, Executite Secretary MRS. ELIZABETH DAVIS, Assistant Secretary Chairmen, Committees MISS LOUISE LATIMER, Art R. H. LEWIS, Exhibits MISS JESSIE FAUSET, Program MRS. MAUDE G. HALL, Publicity MRS. WILLIAM PICKENS, Hostesses MRS. DAISY TAPLEY, Music WILLIAM SERVICE BELL, Buin*ess Honorarv Committee MRS. ADDIE W. HUNTON MISS BYRDIE HAYNES MRS. A. DzG. SMITH MRS. V. W. STOKES MRS. E. A. JOHNSON MISS JULIA HIBLER GEORGE YOUNG MRS. LUCY HENSON W. 0. THOMPSON MRS. P. F. ANDERSON MRS. RUTH STEVENSON ALEXANDER KING ARTHUR SCHOMBURG DR. CHARLES MARTIN W. C. ANDERSON FIG. 3.-First page of catalog of Exhibition by Negro Artists, 1922. Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, 1924-79, box 2, folder 3, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York.
406 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other states such as South Carolina and Virginia were also represented. Fauset's idea of an audience may have been more along the lines of circulation figures for The Crisis, which in 1922 would have been around 49,750 copies a month [54, p. 214]. Drama Just as paintings and sculpture by black artists did not find a broad audience until the end of the 1920s, neither was there much call for drama by or about blacks during the early years of the decade. Black actors such as Charles Gilpin and Paul Robeson had found interna- tional acclaim, but they were assigned roles created by white writers. While no longer cast exclusively in minstrel comedy routines, they still were enacting a white man's image of the black man on stages patron- ized by white audiences. When blacks were permitted in the theater seats, they were often consigned to the uppermost balcony. Some early community theaters provided good training for black actors, but the plays produced at the Lincoln Theater at 135th Street and Lenox Ave- nue, for example, were for the most part the creation of white authors: Shakespeare's plays, The Count of Monte Cristo, and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. There was the sense that even those pieces written by blacks, such as the review Shuffle Along, which ushered in the decade of the musical review and debuted black stars such as Josephine Baker and Florence Mills, were written with whites as their primary audience [55, pp. 288, 290]. Du Bois articulated most clearly the need for another kind of theater, ''a center where Negro actors before Negro audiences interpret Negro life as depicted by Negro artists, but which shall also always have a wel- come for all artists of all races and for all sympathetic comers and for all beautiful ideas" [56]. Du Bois found a willing home for the play- house in the basement of the 135th Street Branch. In a 1926 article in The Crisis, he credited Rose with the initial idea. In the New York movement, advantage is being taken of the fact that in the center of Harlem there is a branch of the New York Public Library, which has in its basement a lecture room. The administration of this library has in the last few years changed from an attitude of aloofness from its Negro surround- ings, and even resentment, to an attitude which recognizes that this library is serving a hundred thousand Negroes or more. It specializes on books which Negroes want to read; it subscribes to their periodicals and has lectures and art exhibits which attract them. Some time ago Miss Ernestine Rose, the Librarian, suggested that a Little Theatre movement be started in connection with this library; but other activi- ties interfered. This year the library authorities expressed their willingness to help equip a small and inexpensive stage in the lecture room and a group of 30 persons interested in such a theatre has been organized [57, p. 136]. The
"THE PLACE TO GO" 407 idea that Rose proposed "some time ago" may have been the Ethiopian Arts Theatre School to which she referred in a 1925 New York Times interview: "Two years ago ... we formed here [in the library] a theatrical group composed of professional actors and actresses and those who were interested in the stage. From this beginning grew the National Ethiopian Art Theatre School, an orga- nization which is now of such breadth that it is working to raise funds for a building of its own and is becoming national in its scope" [14, p. 16]. Du Bois' comment about the administration's aloofness from its black surroundings is curious. It could refer back more than a "few years" to the years before Rose's arrival. Or it could reflect the fact that Du Bois chose not to get involved in its many activities until 1926. While the names of Fauset and Augustus Dill of The Crisis appear on various lists of library supporters, Du Bois' name is noticeably absent during the early years. But when he did turn to the library, he publi- cized broadly their (and his) efforts, and as a result we have far more information on Du Bois' Krigwa Players Little Negro Theatre at the 135th Street Branch than we do for earlier endeavors (see the playbill cover designed by Aaron Douglas in fig. 4). With the library providing a stage, dressing rooms, and lighting equipment, the thirty members of the Krigwa Players provided the cur- tain, scenery, the plays, and the audience. The group included such notables as Du Bois; actor Burroughs; playwrights Zora Neale Hurston, Eulalie Spence, and Harold Jackman; and business manager Augustus Dill, among others. Much of the scenery was painted by Louise Latimer and Aaron Douglas. While Rose may have approached Du Bois with the idea of housing a theater at the library, the control of the theater group was clearly in the hands of the community. The four principles that underlaid the new dramatic movement were revolutionary in their simplicity: "One: About us. That is, they [the plays] must have plots which reveal Negro life as it is. Two: By us. That is, they must be written by Negro authors who understand from birth and continual association just what it means to be a Negro today. Three: For us. That is, the theatre must cater primarily to Negro audiences and be supported and sus- tained by their entertainment and approval. Fourth: Near Us. The the- atre must be in a Negro neighborhood near the mass of ordinary Negro people." 14 The opening season, May 1926, saw the production of three one-act plays in the basement of the 135th Street Branch: Compromise and The Broken Banjo by Willis Richardson, and The Church Fight by Mrs. Ruth Ada Gaines-Shelton. The second season included plays by W. J. Jeffer- son, Spence, and Georgia Douglas Johnson. The auditorium-theater, 14. These principles were printed on all the pamphlets and playbills for the Krigwa Players as well as in Du Bois' article on the origins of the Krigwa theater [57, p. 134].
KRIGWA PLAYERS LITTLE NEGRO THEATRE A N attempt to establish in High Harlem, New York City, a Little 'eA Theatre which shall be primarily a center where Negro actors before Negro audiences interpret Negro life as depicted by Negro artists; but which shall also always have a welcome for all artists of all races and for all sympathetic comers and for all beautiful ideas. _~~~~~~~~~~~~m A. DOUGiLAS At their Playhouse Basement of the 135th Street Branch, New York Public Library FIG. 4.-Playbill cover of Krigwa Players Little Negro Theatre, 1926. Programs and Playbills Collection, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 409 which seated two hundred people, was filled for most performances [57, p. 136]. As with the visual arts, there was considerable interest in the type of drama being produced by black playwrights. Du Bois tried to encour- age black writers by offering literary prizes and publishing their plays in The Crisis. But he recognized that in addition to finding an appro- priate black drama to produce, actors to interpret it, a facility to stage it, and an audience to view it, there must be a change in the attitude of blacks toward the arts. After instituting a policy of charging $5.00 to anyone wishing to produce one of the plays printed in The Crisis, he was surprised at the strong opposition he met. In an editorial in the magazine in November 1926, Du Bois chastised those who opposed such a modest fee, finding in such a reaction a fundamental problem: "Plumbers, carpenters and bricklayers we pay without question; the workman is worthy of his hire. But if a man writes a play, and a good play, he is lucky if he earns first-class postage upon it" [58, p. 7]. A commercial market, that is, white market, would not be interested in the kind of play that Du Bois was publishing: "a Negro play that will interest us and depict our life, experience and humor." The Krigwa Players lasted only two years, but it laid a foundation that other community theater groups would follow. Although she did not mention a date, the librarian Regina Anderson Andrews recalled meet- ings in the library basement to plan the Harlem Experimental Theatre, to be patterned after the Krigwa Players: "a few of us sat in the base- ment of the 135th Street Library one night, and we began to talk about wanting to write and produce our own dramas. Plays and reviews of black people were on downtown stages, but few were presented in Har- lem where the black playwright's audience lived. We had few plays to work with and almost none of recent date" [33, p. 69]. Library as Public Sphere The 135th Street Branch seems to have epitomized the kind of space Rose described in her writings about community libraries. It provided a space for inquiry and discourse, for the display of artistic endeavors, and for the production of dramatic works that would have had few other channels of expression. Those involved in these endeavors com- prised a network of social capital within the Harlem community: the librarians and assistants used their connections to enrich the program- ming of the library, and the literary and artistic aspirants took advan- tage of the institution to find new audiences. Today we might look at the library as an example of a "black public sphere." The German social theoristJurgen Habermas used the term "public sphere" to de- scribe that discursive space between the private and governmental
410 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY realms symbolized by seventeenth- and eighteenth-century coffee- houses that accompanied the development of the bourgeois public in the transition from feudalism to capitalism. "The public sphere may be conceived above all as the sphere of private people come together as a public" [59, p. 27]. It stood between the domain of the private citizen and that of the government, providing a forum for debate of issues vital to the community and to the citizenry of a democracy. And even though it was a state-supported institution, the library seems to have enjoyed a singular degree of autonomy in its programs and direc- tion. Commenting on the "black public sphere," contemporary authors have expanded Habermas' notion beyond such bourgeois borders as "the world of magazines and coffee shops, salons and highbrow tracts" to in- clude a much broader spectrum of "speech communities" such as rap music, prison, the sports arena, newspapers, and mass political rallies [60, pp. 11-13]. But just as Habermas' public sphere was located in a specific time and place in history, we can look for specific public spheres in Har- lem in the 1920s. Harlem's public spheres may have included the black churches, the street corners, UNIA rallies, and the publications of the NAACP and Urban League, as well as the more radical publications such as Fire! and The Messenger. But it was the library that proved capable of encompassing the greatest range of voices. Unlike Garvey's mass move- ments or Du Bois' The Crisis, the library did not have an agenda or polemic to advance. But it did provide a place for dialogue on issues of real con- cern to this community. The political debates that took place in the library auditorium were obvious examples of this kind of forum. Du Bois' princi- ple of integration-though not subordination-with white culture stood in sharp contrast to the extreme separatist fantasies of Marcus Garvey, even though many in the library audience were sympathetic with or even active supporters of the latter. The cultural debates of how blacks should be portrayed in the arts, as seen in the discourse surrounding the art exhibitions, poetry readings, and plays staged at the library, were no less vital to this particular population. The 135th Street Branch was a public sphere that was truly open to its public, and nowhere was this accessibility more evident than in its book collection. The Collection: Connecting with History In his forward to The New Negro, a collection of poems, essays, articles, and short stories by young black writers, Locke observed that "Of all the voluminous literature on the Negro, so much is mere external view and commentary that we may warrantably say that nine-tenths of it is
"THE PLACE TO GO" 411 about the Negro rather than of him, so that it is the Negro problem rather than the Negro that is known and mooted in the general mind. ... we shall let the Negro speak for himself" [61, p. ix]. In the early 1920s the 135th Street Branch provided an opportunity for black writers and artists who had few other outlets to speak for themselves and find an audience. Thus, art exhibits, dramatic presenta- tions, music recitals, lectures, forums and discussion groups constituted many of the activities that went on there. Rose recognized that the library was providing a much-needed forum for the black artist in a world that generally lay closed to him or her. As she reflected years later, "Later, when the world invited and welcomed Negro art in its various forms, the library no longer needed to sponsor work in these fields, except incidentally and occasionally" [6, p. 106]. Distinguishing such efforts from similar activities in other institutions, Rose argued that the library programs were established on the "foundation of solid reading." Such activities "find their natural home in the library, which has the essential tools for implementing and interpreting such pro- grams" [6, p. 111]. Rose recognized early on that the population housed in Harlem, although 90 percent black, represented a broad spectrum of background, education, occupation, and social standing. While many accounts of the Harlem Renaissance refer to the library at 135th Street and Lenox as a cultural and literary center for the com- munity, the library served a much broader public. In an article pub- lished in an issue of Survey Graphic in 1922, Rose tried to convey some of the complexity of the population as well as its dreams: the varieties of black folk who stream into the library building which serves the book needs of that colored section of the city-black and yellow, stately Hindoo, proud West Indian, mulatto American, little black pickaninny, tur- banned mammy, porter, college professor, nursemaid, student.... Here is a medical student who takes a waiter's tips in the Pennsylvania Station, a book- seller who supports a precarious business on a Pullman porter's fees, an artist who all night runs an elevator up and down, an art connoisseur of national reputation who passes bills in a bank. The application desk of a public library serves as a doorway into the "other half' of many lives, the half which lives while not working for a living, the half which thinks, aspires and endures [62, p. 75]. The reading material chosen by the population was as diverse as the readers: "history, sociology, philosophy, poetry, . . . engineering, car- pentering, tailoring, automobile mechanics, hairdressing, business ad- vertising, cooking." What struck this white librarian as she worked in this community was a growing interest in reading "racial books, on African life and history, American slave days, present-day race prob- lems" [62, p. 75]. But even in this interest Rose recognized "separating fissures of thought and belief within the group itself." The divisions
412 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of nationality, education and political beliefs cut across American, Afri- can, and West Indian blacks; neither was there a unified view about racial matters and the degree to which blacks wanted to be assimilated into the white culture and society. As early as 1922 Rose was writing about her twofold task: On the one hand, race pride and race knowledge must be stimulated and guided. To this end, clubs for the study of race history are established. Books on Africa and the Negro are provided as extensively as possible.... Interest in Negro art and music is stimulated. An annual Negro arts exhibit is held, and a forum is conducted for the discussion of race matters. But the library aims not only to be an intellectual center for Negroes; its further purpose is to fulfill its function as an American democratic institution and to furnish a common ground where diverse paths may meet and clashing interests find union.... For its accomplishment the beneficent aid of great books is most important. Education must be the method of democracy.... The mission of the school is a tremendous one, but that of the library is as great, for its doors are open to young and old alike, and its scope is that of the greatest literature of all ages.... But in a library all activities must be subservient to one thing, the assembling of books-those that will educate and not deteriorate, those that will cause growth and not decay [62, pp. 75-76]. To meet this ever-growing demand for books concerning race, Rose doubled the library's efforts in collecting such materials. By 1924, how- ever, the collection was in danger of being literally read to death. "So avidly were [the books on the Negro] read, in fact, that their mortality exceeded their birth rate" [63, p. 188]. As she did with the other ventures that she had initiated at the li- brary, Rose turned quickly to her constituency for help, singling out those in the best position to be able to help. In a March 1924 letter to Du Bois in, she asked, "I am writing to ask your presence at a meeting called to discuss the formation of a Negroid Department in this library. The project has been under consideration for some time. There are many points to be discussed and decided upon in connection with it, and I am asking you, who have signified your interest in the library and its place in the community to be present and to lend your counsel in a matter, which may be of vital significance" [64]. Following this meeting, which Du Bois could not attend, Rose outlined the plan on which the committee had agreed. The purpose was stated succinctly: "to make easily available for permanent public use a large and repre- sentative body of material expressive of Negro culture in the past and the present" [21, p. 285]. The collection would be housed at the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library until it required and could justify its own building, and it was to be administered by a "prop- erly equipped colored person" [21, p. 285].
"THE PLACE TO GO" 413 While Du Bois' name does not appear on the list of the committee that did form the following December to address this issue, the corre- spondence illustrates the efforts that Rose was continually making to bring in the brightest talent and advice she could enlist as she ex- panded the library services. Schomburg, the Puerto Rican bibliophile whose collection would eventually form the core of the center, was named President of the Citizens Committee which also includedJames Weldon Johnson of the NAACP; Harrison, the soapbox orator and oc- casional lecturer for the New York City Board of Education; and John Nail, the prominent real estate magnate in Harlem. The meeting of this group of individuals was noted as far away as the Pittsburgh Courier in a news article explaining the idea of creating an organization de- voted to the study and preservation of black history and literature. The article named the twenty-nine persons in attendance who registered themselves as the first members of the organization [65]. The Commit- tee decided that the solution to this pressing problem of depleting the book stock could be solved by removing those most irreplaceable items from circulation and establishing a reference room for them. On the evening of May 7, 1925, the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints was officially opened with a considerable degree of fanfare and public notice. With Schomburg officiating, the program for the event lists addresses by Harrison; Locke; James Weldon Johnson; as well as Dr. E. H. Anderson, director of the New York Public Library; Hopper, head of the system's Branch Libraries; and Rose. Songs and a piano solo by black composers and an exhibition of oil paintings, pastels, and drawings by Braxton completed the program [66]. In an article included in Locke's anthology The New Negro, Schomburg provided a descriptive survey of highlights of historical writings of people of African descent. In the essay he referred to the 1924 exhibit: "Not long ago, the Public Library of Harlem housed a special exhibition of books, pamphlets, prints and old engravings, that simply said, to skeptic and believer alike, to scholar and school-child, to proud black and astonished white, 'Here is the Evidence' . . . there were in these cases materials not only for the first true writing of Negro history, but for the rewriting of many impor- tant paragraphs of our common American history" [67, p. 232]. The degree to which the library could fill its public role-could serve its public-was dependent upon its becoming a valued entity within that community. Just as soliciting the aid of influential citizens enriched the programs in the arts and literature, the publicity and ceremony sur- rounding this new effort of expanding the book collection proved fruit- ful. In the special Harlem issue of Survey Graphic, the editorial page high- lighted the contributions the library had made to the community and appealed to its public on behalf of the library's new endeavor:
414 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Although there is rich and varied material by and about Negroes, it is so widely scattered in homes, in bookshops, in great reference libraries where it is a small part of the whole, and in private collections that it is comparatively un- known to most white people and to a large proportion of Negroes themselves. ... Much of the material sought for this collection consists of rare, out-of- print or costly books. It is hoped that many such now lost to the public in garrets or second-hand shops will find their way to a collection so well-founded and so safeguarded for their use.... Survey readers who can help in gathering such material are invited to do so and should communicate with Ernestine Rose, branch librarian, 103 West 135th Street, New York [68, pp. 699-700]. The original collection of books was immediately enhanced by con- tributions from the private libraries of Schomburg, Harrison, John E. Bruce, Louise Latimer, George Young, and Dr. Charles D. Martin [69, p. 2]. The most significant collection of black history and literature of international scope belonged to Schomburg, but in spite of his involve- ment in the Citizens' Committee to establish the Negro Division, it is not at all clear that he had in mind locating his entire collection at the library. Schomburg had been collecting materials on black history and culture since he was a young man. Details of his life growing up in Puerto Rico are few. He apparently attended elementary school in San Juan and may have attended a Jesuit school as well, but did not com- plete his studies. After arriving in America at the age of seventeen, he was mostly self taught. Unlike most book collectors of such fame, he was not a wealthy man; he was employed as head of the foreign mailing department at Bankers Trust Company of New York [4, p. 35]. But his passion lay in collecting books, prints, and artifacts pertaining to blacks, an interest attributed to a remark Schomburg heard from a fifth grade teacher that blacks had no history. Schomburg not only knew, and set out to prove, that blacks had a rich history, but he also believed that the careful and systematic study of that history was "a prime social necessity for the Negro" [67, p. 231]. A column in a 1922 issue of The Crisis acknowledges the importance of this avocation: [Schomburg's] library, devoted exclusively to books pertaining to the Negro race and by persons of Negro descent, is one of the most remarkable libraries of its kind in existence.... The value of Mr. Schomburg's library is attested fully by the fact that his home in Brooklyn, New York, has become the Mecca for scholars from all parts of the United States and many have come from abroad to do research therein. Mr. Schomburg has immortalized himself in the great zeal with which he has applied himself to the task of preserving the evidences of Negro culture in all ages [70, p. 220]. A much publicized "Negro exhibit," organized by the 135th Street Branch's staff and held at the central New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue in the fall of 1925, led to a much wider reputation for Schom- burg's collection which had provided much of the material for the
"THE PLACE TO GO" 415 exhibit [4, pp. 134-35]. Rose was fully aware of the value of Schom- burg's collection and wanted it for the newly created Division of Negro Literature and History. In October 1925, she wrote to L. Hollingsworth Wood, president of the Urban League, to enlist his support for her view that the collection belonged in the library: I have learned that [Schomburg's] collection is for sale . . . it would be a calamity to let this collection leave the United States, where it should serve the purpose of enlightenment to both races and where such an educational process is so necessary. The Society of Negro Literature and History, which is backing the Negro reference library in this branch, and the members of my staff, as well as many community people have hoped eventually to procure Mr. Schomburg's collec- tion for our library. This is the only attempt, so far as I know, to form a collec- tion of Negro literature in a public institution and at the same time to render it of easy and popular access to all people. Moreover, it is located in the greatest Negro city in the world, and will be safe guarded in every possible way to the people whom it concerns [2, p. 23]. By December Schomburg was seriously considering offers to pur- chase his collection, which was expanding beyond the capacity of his home to contain it. In February 1926, he offered it to the National Urban League, although specifics regarding this offer are unknown. Wood and staff members Charles S. Johnson and Eugene Kinckle Jones, perhaps persuaded by Rose's arguments, advised Schomburg that the 135th Street Branch would be the appropriate place for the collec- tion, as the Urban League lacked the necessary staff and facilities for it. With a $10,000 grant from the Carnegie Corporation, the New York Public Library purchased the Schomburg collection in March 1926. The official description of the collection was 2,932 volumes, 1,124 pam- phlets, and many valuable prints and manuscripts, and Schomburg continued his collecting, donating much more to the library [4, p. 141]. Some of the oldest materials were the work of Juan Latino, a Spaniard of African blood who held the chair of poetry at the University of Granada in the mid-1500s and who was considered the best Latinist of his time [71, p. 1013]. The grant was not enough to provide a salary for Schomburg to curate the collection. Catherine Latimer, who had been at the library since 1920, was put in charge until 1932, when an- other Carnegie grant provided the funding to hire Schomburg as the collection's first curator. At his death in 1938 the division was renamed the Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature and History. In the decades that followed, the library's activities and mission varied some- what with its different administrators' visions, but by the 1960s it was apparent that the collection needed substantial financial resources to continue its preservation and collection efforts. In 1972, the collection,
416 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY then numbering over 43,000 volumes, was moved from the jurisdiction of the Branch Library system to become one of four research libraries of the New York Public Library, under the new name of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. Although the library was apparently not Schomburg's first choice, possibly because he guessed there would be insufficient funds for such a purchase, the final decision was much heralded. A 1927 newspaper editorial in the Amsterdam News paid tribute to Schomburg and his vi- sion: "Harlem's acquisition of the remarkable library means that the Negro does not have to remain in ignorance of the culture his forbears evinced in many lands before and since his subjugation-a culture as brilliant as that of any people. The future historian of the Negro who does not avail himself of the Schomburg collection cannot be taken seriously. Schomburg's accomplishment is enhanced by the fact that he was unaided in his task, even by the most liberal element of white people, and that the selections are entirely his own" [72]. In 1927, the first year the Harmon Foundation awarded its prizes, Schomburg received a bronze medal for his contributions in the area of education. He was in good company that year, as the other prize winners were Cullen, James Weldon Johnson, and artist Hale Wood- ruff. But while the collection received considerable notice from within the community and beyond, Schomburg was not without his detractors during his lifetime.'5 His position as curator of his own collection was a tenuous one, and subject to renewal after an initial three-year contract. McKay commented on the controversy surrounding Schomburg's origi- nal appointment as curator of the Schomburg collection: "When white library officials offered Arthur Schomburg the job to become curator of the books which he himself had collected, the black academicians, led by Dr. Du Bois, fought against the appointment on the ground that Schomburg did not possess a college degree!" [4, pp. 160, 190]. Conclusion Many have questioned the permanence of the legacy of the black artists and writers who reached a wide and cosmopolitan audience during the 1920's "when Harlem was in vogue.""6 Referring to Wallace Thurman's 15. At least three articles appeared in the New York Times describing the acquisition. [73-75]. 16. The title of Lewis' work on the "Harlem Renaissance" draws on Hughes' chapter "When the Negro Was in Vogue" in his autobiography [76]. William L. Andrews discusses the legacy of, as well as the use of the term "Harlem Renaissance" in the introduction to his anthology [77].
"THE PLACE TO GO" 417 Infants of the Spring, Hughes commented that it was "the only novel by a Negro about that fantastic period when Harlem was in vogue.... I was there. I had a swell time while it lasted. But I thought it wouldn't last long. For how could a large and enthusiastic number of people be crazy about Negroes forever?" [76, pp. 227-28]. As we look at the Schomburg Center at the beginning of the twenty-first century, it at pears that interest in black history and culture is in no danger of dying out. There can be no doubt about the legacy of the collection that grew at the 135th Street Branch during the Harlem Renaissance. Indeed, it may be the single most significant legacy of that movement, as it contin- ues to provide the public access to an incredibly rich and abundant heritage that had for so long been ignored. But the story of the 135th Street Branch library is larger than its transformation into a world-renowned repository of knowledge; it serves as a model of the library finding its place in its community. Any library advocate will claim that the library as an institution lies or should lie at the heart of a community, whether that community be a school, a university, a town, or large city. But the degree to which a constituency values its library varies considerably from place to place and from time to time. From the first few months that Rose assumed leadership-a leadership she readily shared with those around her- the 135th Street Branch became a vital cog in a complex community. It served as a public sphere in which sharply divergent ideas about race, art, literature, and politics could be exchanged. While a mission state- ment as such does not appear in the records of this library, its head librarian articulated her philosophy of what a library should be and do for a community. Through her words, through records of the activities that took place at the 135th Street Branch, and through the words of those who remembered it, we have a picture of a library that mattered. In a recent essay entitled "Achieving Black Economic Self-Reliance: The Urban Public Library Strengthens the Economic Base of Its Com- munity," James C. Welbourne asserts, "The total irrelevance of the public library among this constituency [the rapidly expanding popula- tions of black, Hispanic, and Asian American ethnic groups] reflects the library's virtual abandonment of the needs of this population in the past" [78, p. 128]. The story of the 135th Street Branch stands as a bold exception to Wel- bourne's claim and can speak to contemporary questions of reaching un- derserved populations. While this particular library is remarkable for the later accomplishments and for the fame of a large number of its users dur- ing the 1920s, the library's original mission-as evidenced in its personnel, programming, and collection policies-laid the groundwork for its success. Indeed, by the end of the decade it would assume a far broader role than
418 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the traditional branch library could ever aspire. Rose and her staff reached into the community and found artists, writers, dramatists, and readers eager for a place to express their ideas and learn about their history. Rose's words of conviction and advice still resonate and could well guide contemporary librarians as they seek to make a meaningful connection with their public. Knowledge of community was foremost, and engagement followed closely. Personal and social relatonships proved as fruifl as professional relation- ships. Through church pastors, school teachers, artists, poets, playwrights, novelists, political spokesmen, magazine editors, society matrons, and librar- ians, networks of social contacts were established that filled the library's auditorium and its reading rooms. Rose came to Harlem to find out what would make this library not only relevant but indispensable to its commu- nity. She enlisted the help of the community, theyjoined her, and together they tumed the 135th Street Branch into "the place to go." REFERENCES 1. Hughes, Langston. "My Early Days in Harlem." Freedomways 3 (Summer 1963): 312-14. 2. Tibbets, Celeste. Emnestine Rose and the Origins of the Schomburg Center. New York: Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, the New York Public Library, 1989. 3. Jenkins, Betty L. "A White Librarian in Black Harlem." Library Quarterly 60 (July 1990): 216-31. 4. Sinnette, Elinor Des Verney. ArthurAlfonso Schomburg, Black Bibliophik and Collector: A Biog- raphy. New York: New York Public Library, 1988. 5. "Miss Rhodes Dies; Integrated Library." New York Amsterdam News (April 15,1961): p. 4. 6. Rose, Ernestine. The Public Library in Amnrican Life. New York: Columbia University Press, 1954. 7. Rose, Ernestine. Bridging the GuIfJ Work with the Russian Jews and Other Newcomers. New York: Immigrant Publication Society, 1917. 8. Rose, Ernestine. "Serving New York's Black City." Library Journal 46 (March 15, 1921): 255-58. 9. "Report of the New York Public Library for 1921." Buletin of the New York Public Library 27 (April 1923): 427. 10. Bontemps, Arna. "Special Collections of Negroana." Library Quarterly 14 (July 1944): 187-93. 11. Matthews, Patrick. Personal E-mail (November 30, 2002). Human Resources Department, New York Public Library. 12. Du Mont, Rosemary. "Race in American Librarianship."Journal of Library Histoty 21 (Sum- mer 1986): 488-509. 13. "Report of the New York Public Library for 1920." Buletin of the New York Public Library 25 (April 1921): 239-40. 14. "Move to Preserve Negro Literature." New York Times (March 15, 1925), p. 16. 15. Rose, Ernestine. "Where White and Black Meet." Southern Workman 51 (October 1922): 467. 16. Musmann, Klaus, "The Ugly Side of Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services from 1900 to 1950." In Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries and Black Librarianship, edited by
"THE PLACE TO GO" 419 John Mark Tucker. Champaign, Ill.: Publications Office, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998. 17. Rose, Ernestine. "Work with Negroes Round Table." Bulletin of the American Library Associ- ation 17 (July 1923): 274-79. 18. Shores, Louis. Quiet World: A Librarian's Questfor Destiny. Hamden, Conn.: Linnet Books, 1975. 19. Rose, Ernestine. "A Librarian in Harlem." Opportunity 1 (July 1923): 206-7, 220. 20. McDougald, Elise Johnson. "The Task of Negro Womanhood." In [61]. 21. Aptheker, Herbert, ed. The Correspondence of W E. B. Du Bois. Vol. 1. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1973. 22. "Memorandum of Interview with Mr. Franklin F. Hopper, Chief of Circulation of the New York Public Library and Miss Ernestine Rose, Librarian of the 135th Street Branch. Monday, January 11, [1932] at 3:30 p.m. in the 42nd Street Library." In The Papers of W E. B. Du Bois. Microform reel 37, frame 259.1 Sanford, N.C.: Sanford Microfilming Corporation of America, 1980-81. 23. Putnam, Robert. MakingDemocracy Work. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994. 24. Peterson, Sadie. "The Library: A Factor in Negro Education." The Messenger (July 1923), pp. 772-73. 25. Cantrell, Clyde H. "Sadie P. Delaney: Bibliotherapist and Librarian." Southeastern Librar- ian 6 (Fall 1956): 105-9. 26. Gubert, Betty K "Sadie Peterson Delaney: Pioneer Bibliotherapist." American Libraries 24 (February 1993): 124-27. 27. Davis, Thadious M. Nella Larsen. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1994. 28. Andrews, Regina [Anderson], interview by Jean Blackwell Hutson, videorecording, July 16, 1986. Moving Image and Recorded Sound Division, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York. 29. Johnson, James Weldon. Along This Way. New York: Viking, 1933. 30. Osofsky, Gilbert. Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto. New York: Harper & Row, 1963. 31. "Race Superiority Bunik, Says Boas." Nev York Amsterdam News (January 31, 1923), pp. 56-57. Reproduced in Harlem on My Mind, edited by Allon Schoener. New York: Random House, 1968; reprint, New York: New Press, 1995. 32. "The Library's Bill of Rights." American Library Association Bulletin 33 (October 15, 1939): 60. 33. Mitchell, Loften. Voices of the Black 7heatre. Clifton, N.J.: White, 1975. 34. Schuyler, George. Black and Conservative. New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1966. 35. Lewis, David Levering. WVhen Harlem Was in Vogue. New York: Knopf, 1981. 36. "The Negro: A Reading List Compiled by the 135th Street Branch, the New York Public Library, Situated in Negro Harlem." Branch Library Book News 2 (December 1925): 133- 36. 37. Rampersad, Arnold. The Life of Langston Hughes. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. 38. Ernestine Rose to W. E. B. Du Bois, January 14, 1925. In The Papers of W. E. B. Du Bois. Microform reel 15, frame 1185. Sanford, N.C.: Sanford Microfilming Corporation of America, 1980-81. 39. Wall, Cheryl. Women of the Harlem Renaissance. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995. 40. Harmon Foundation. Harnon Foundation in Cooperation with the National Alliance of Art and Industry Presents an Exhibition of Work fy Negro Arlists, February 20 to March 4, 1933. New York: The Foundation, 1933. 41. Dover, Cedric. American Negro Art. Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic Society, 1960. 42. Campbell, Mary Schmidt. Harlem Renaissance: Art of Black Amenrca. New York: Studio Mu- seum in Harlem and Abrams, 1987, p. 169.
420 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 43. "Negro Art." The Crisis 23 (January 1922): 107. 44. "Catalog of Exhibition by Negro Artists Held at New York Public Library 103 West 135th Street August 1st to October 1st 1922." Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, 1924- 79, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. 45. "Our Young Negro Artists." Opportunity 1 (January 1923): 16. 46. "Exhibition of Harlem Negro Artists Work Opened at 135th St. Branch Public Library." Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. 47. Rose, Ernestine. "A Negro Art Exhibit." Southern Workman 51 (December 1922): 542- 43. 48. Holbrook, Francis. "A Group of Negro Artists." Opportunity 1 (July 1923): 213. 49. Locke, Alain. "To Certain of Our Philistines." Opportunity 3 (May 1925): 155. 50. Schuyler, George S. "The Negro-Art Hokum." The Nation (June 16, 1926), pp. 662-63. 51. Hughes, Langston. "The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain." The Nation (June 28, 1926), pp. 692-94. 52. Letter from E. C. Williams, executive secretary of the Negro Arts Exhibit. Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, box 1, folder 11, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. 53. Jessie Fauset to Ernestine Rose, n.d. Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. 54. "Twelfth Annual Report of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People." The Crisis 23 (March 1922): 214. 55. Huggins, Nathan. Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971. 56. Program of Krigwa Players Little Negro Theatre, 1926. Manuscripts, Programs and Play- bills Collection, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Rec- ords, New York. 57. Du Bois, W. E. B. "Krigwa Players Little Negro Theatre." The Crisis 33 (July 1926): 134- 36. 58. Du Bois, W. E. B. "Paying for Plays." The Crisis 33 (November 1926): 7-8. 59. Habermas, Jurgen. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Cate- goty of Bourgeois Socety. Translated by Thomas Burger. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989. 60. Baker, Houston A. "Critical Memory and the Black Public Sphere." In The Black Public Sphere: A Public Culture Book, edited by Black Public Sphere Collective, pp. 1 1-13. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 61. Locke, Alain, ed. The New Negro: An Interpretation. New York: Boni, 1925; reprint, New York: Arno, 1968. 62. Rose, Ernestine. "Books and the Color Line." Survey 15 (April 1922): 75-76. 63. Bontemps, Arna. "Special Collections of Negroana." Library Quarterly 14 (July 1944):187- 93. 64. Ernestine Rose to W. E. B. Du Bois (March 6, 1924). In Papers of W E. B. Du Bois. Micro- film, reel 13, frame 1032. Sanford, N.C.: Sanford Microfilming Corporation of America, 1980-81. 65. "Harlem Leaders Back Negro." Pittsburgh Courier 27 (December 1924). Clipping file, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York. 66. New York Public Library. Programme of the Opening of the Department of Negro Literature and History, May 7, 1925. Manuscripts, Archives and Rare Books Division, 1924-79, box 2, folder 13, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Records, New York. 67. Schomburg, Arthur. "The Negro Digs Up His Past." In [61]. 68. Editorial. Survey Graphic 6 (March 1925): 699-700. 69. Biddle, Stanton F. "A Partnership in Progress." Journal/ Schomburg Centerfor Research in Black Culture 1 (Spring 1978): 2.
"THE PLACE TO GO" 421 70. "The Horizon." The Crisis 23 (March 1922): 220. 71. Rose, Ernestine. "Books and the Negro." Library Journal 52 (November 1, 1927): 1012- 14. 72. "A Worthy Recipient for Spingarn Medal." New York Amsterdam News (January 26, 1927), 20. 73. "Gift to Public Library." New York Times (May 26, 1926), p. 25. 74. "Negro Records in Library." New York Times (January 15, 1927) p. 8. 75. "Books on Negro Acquired by Uptown Branch Library." New York Times (February 27, 1927), sec. 7, p. 17. 76. Hughes, Langston. The Big Sea. New York: Knopf, 1940. 77. Andrews, William L. Classic Fiction of the Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 78. Josey, E. J., ed. The Black Librarian in America Revisited. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1994.